How to Train Your Dragon is centered around a teenage Viking named Hiccup (voiced by Jay Baruchel) who lives on the island of Berk with the rest of his tribe. 
Over the course of seven generations, Berk has been continuously raided by dragons of all different species, prompting a war between them and the tribe. Like every other young Viking on Berk, Hiccup is expected to fight and kill a dragon in order to be considered a true Viking. 
However, he is very small for a Viking of his age, and can hardly lift and use traditional Viking weapons and even has a tendency to cause accidents. His father is Stoick the Vast (voiced by Gerard Butler), who is also chief of the tribe, and tries to keep Hiccup indoors as often as possible.
During one particular attack on the village, while working his post in Gobber's (voiced by Craig Ferguson) smithy, Hiccup decides to prove himself as a Viking and capture a dragon using his own methods rather than standard Viking brutality. Using a bola shot from a cannon he designed and built himself, Hiccup is overjoyed when he hits a dragon in mid-air, thinking it's the rare and dangerous Night Fury. 
Having not paid attention to in the chaos, no one else in the village believes him because no one ever even saw a Night Fury, let alone brought one down. Hiccup goes to the forest at Raven Point to bring back the dragon's heart as proof to Stoick. Meanwhile, Stoick and Gobber discuss Hiccup's behavior, after a meeting is held in the Great Hall, and how to make him into a proper Viking. Although initially hesitant, Stoick agrees to enlist his son into Dragon Training in the hope it will toughen him up and give him survival skills before preparing to lead an expedition to take out the Dragon's Nest.
Despite being told to go home, Hiccup disobeys his father and heads out to the forest. He searches for some time but can't find where the dragon went down. Luckily, Hiccup finds a broken tree and churned up ground, leading him to the downed dragon which is tied up in the bola shot. He psychs himself up in preparation to cut out the dragon's heart with his belt knife, but after seeing the fear in the helpless dragon's eyes as it looks back at him, he can't bring himself to kill it. After cutting it free from the ropes, the Night Fury pounces on him and the situation is now reversed: 
Hiccup is clearly afraid and the dragon stares intently into his eyes for several moments. When it rears up, Hiccup cringes as he thinks it's going to kill him, but it instead roars angrily in his face before attempting to fly off into the trees. Hiccup attempts to walk away but faints from the encounter.
On the first day of Dragon Training, Snotlout, Ruffnut and Tuffnut continue to mock Hiccup. He nearly gets killed by a Gronckle, but is saved in the nick of time by Gobber. As Gobber stows the beast away, he mentions a dragon "will always go in for the kill". Hiccup returns to where he found the Night Fury, wondering why it hadn't attempted to kill him. 
Following the path the dragon flew off to, Hiccup notices half of the Night Fury's tail was torn off in its crash and can't exit the small cove which it became trapped in. Attempting to finally record actual information about Night Furies, Hiccup drops his pencil and alerts the dragon to his presence, but the Night Fury only stares at him. Later that night, Hiccup reads the Dragon Manual in hopes to learn more about the creature, but it only says the Night Fury is extremely dangerous.
After barely surviving a Deadly Nadder in Dragon Training shortly afterward, Hiccup attempts to get closer to the Night Fury by offering a fish. The dragon's attitude, on guard after spotting his belt knife, greatly improves after Hiccup tosses it away in the cove pool to prove his intentions. It cautiously takes the offering of fish using its retractable teeth and regurgitates some of it to share with Hiccup. To stay on good terms, Hiccup takes a bite of the raw fish (now covered with dragon's drool), and is forced to swallow with some disgust as the dragon watches expectantly, and is surprised to see the dragon attempt to imitate a smile. 
However, his attempts to touch the Night Fury cause it to fly off to the other side of the cove. Later that same day while attempting to sleep, the Night Fury is curious Hiccup hasn't left and walks over to see the boy drawing an outline of the dragon's head in the dirt. Curious about the drawing, the dragon snaps off a large tree branch and attempts to do the same, making deep impressions in the ground of random scribbles to try to draw Hiccup's head. Hiccup is amazed by it and when the dragon growls when he steps on it, takes care not to stand on the drawing before finally getting close enough to the Night Fury to touch it.
It still doesn't allow him to do so, but when he only holds his hand out, palm open and leaves it to the dragon to decide, it presses its nose into it.
Later that night, Hiccup learns from Gobber a dragon without its wings can't fly, explaining why the Night Fury can't leave the cove. Hiccup attempts to get the Night Fury, which he names Toothless after the dragon's retractable teeth, to fly again through the use of an artificial tail fin. It soon becomes clear after a test run the design needs improvements and Toothless can't fly on his own. Through testing new versions of the fin, Hiccup learns things about dragons from experiences with Toothless. 
He pushes a Hideous Zippleback into its cage through learning the dragon's distaste for eel, incapacitates a Gronckle using knowledge of Toothless' love of garlic grass, or "Dragon Nip", leads a Terrible Terror into its cage by having it chase a beam of light like a cat, and incapacitates a Deadly Nadder by scratching it below the chin. The Viking adults see these feats of "subduing" dragons without actually harming them as a sign of greatness. The other Vikings teens watch in awe as Hiccup improves his skills, but Astrid her rivalry turns into extreme jealousy.
As Hiccup becomes popular with his technique of incapacitating dragons rather than killing them, Astrid notices his strange behavior of leaving after every session. Stoick returns from his unsuccessful attempt to find the Dragon Nest and is surprised to hear how well Hiccup does in Dragon Training. Shortly after, Hiccup perfects his design of the prosthetic fin and helps Toothless take a successful flight around the island. After taking a lunch break with several wild Terrible Terrors, Hiccup realizes everything the Vikings know about dragons is wrong.
Stoick sees Hiccup and tells about his surprise of him succeeding in dragon training. Stoick gives Hiccup a helmet as a reward. In the arena, Astrid loses out on the right to kill their first dragon in the final test: a Monstrous Nightmare. An angry Astrid follows Hiccup to the small cove where he plans to leave Berk with Toothless to avoid taking part in his final exam. While she interrogates Hiccup about his skills, Toothless, thinking Astrid is a threat, attempts to attack her and subsequently exposes Hiccup's relationship with the dragon. In an attempt to keep Toothless a secret, Toothless pulls Astrid onto the top of a tree, and Hiccup offers her a ride on the dragon's back to show her he means no harm. Astrid reluctantly accepts Hiccup's offer, but a cautious and annoyed Toothless fakes extreme attempts to throw her off. After Astrid admits she's sorry for what she tried to do, Toothless stops his acrobatics and takes them on a calming romantic flight above the clouds. Astrid's view on dragons is changed and she comes to think Toothless is amazing.
Hiccup and Astrid are both surprised when Toothless changes course and flies alongside other dragons that carry food to their Nest. Toothless follows them and hides as Hiccup and Astrid discover the dragons aren't eating their kill themselves. Instead, they feed it to the Red Death, a gigantic titan wing dragon. The dragons are forced to feed the Red Death with what they steal from Berk or else they will be eaten by it instead, as proven with an unlucky Gronckle and a Hideous Zippleback.
After they escape the Nest and return home, Astrid wants to tell Stoick and the village about the Nest, but Hiccup is adamant that she does not do so, otherwise they would kill Toothless. Shocked, she asks in disbelief if he would go that far to "protect his pet dragon". Unlike the uncertain and hesitant Hiccup she's always known, Hiccup looks right at her and tells her "yes", causing her to see him in a new light. Astrid promises to keep Toothless a secret and punches Hiccup in the shoulder for "kidnapping" her before kissing him on the cheek for "everything else".
The final test begins. Instead of killing it, however, Hiccup tries to tame it to prove the dragons aren't dangerous creatures. His father's insistence on stopping the test makes the Monstrous Nightmare revert into its regular state into attacking Hiccup. Toothless hears his human friend's cries of fear and help from the cove and rushes to save him, climbing out of the cove by himself and running through the forest. Astrid enters the battle arena in an attempt to save Hiccup but fails to fight off the Monstrous Nightmare. Stoick helps Astrid get out of the arena but Hiccup is stopped short when the dragon blocks him from escaping. Toothless arrives in the nick of time and saves Hiccup by fighting away the Monstrous Nightmare.
The other Vikings are in awe at the Night Fury and jump into the arena to capture him. In defense, Toothless attacks the Vikings, including Stoick, to stop them from harming his human friend. Hiccup tries to order Toothless to leave before he is captured, but Toothless's strong devotion to protecting Hiccup causes him to stay put. Hiccup barely stops Toothless from using his fire on Stoick before the Vikings eventually overwhelm him. Hiccup tries to explain to his father dragons are nowhere near as harmful as they think they are and why the Dragons were so fierce when they took the Viking's livestock, but Stoick refuses to listen, outraged at his son for befriended his enemy. 
During his attempt to explain, Hiccup accidentally mentions the Dragon's Nest, the Red Death, and its treatment of the dragons and says only a dragon can enter the Nest, giving Stoick the idea to use Toothless as the ticket to get there. Hiccup tries to warn his father about the Red Death but Stoick still refuses to listen and simply says to Hiccup that he is no longer his son and accuses him of siding with the dragons.
The Vikings prepare themselves and leave to fight the dragons, keeping Toothless chained up aboard one of their ships. Hiccup watches them leave from the village's harbor just as Astrid comes to him and talks about his situation. Hiccup rants about being the first Viking in 300 years who wouldn't kill a dragon, prompting Astrid to ask him why he didn't kill Toothless. Hiccup explains he saw Toothless was as afraid as he was. Astrid encourages him to take action and get Toothless back. He teaches the other teens how to ride the arena dragons, then flies their way to the Dragon's Nest.
The Vikings reach the Nest using a shackled Toothless as a guide, then use catapults to blow a hole in the Nest's lower base. Upon doing so, the dragons flee from the enraged Red Death, causing it to break through the side and attack the Vikings, setting all of the longboats on fire, including the one Toothless is chained up on, leaving them with no escape. Stoick realizes the scale of the fight Hiccup tried to tell him and curses himself as a fool. He, along with Gobber, decide to sacrifice themselves to let the others escape. Meanwhile Hiccup trains the dragons in the arena that he and the teens fought earlier in the movie. 
As the war among the Vikings and the Red Death continues, Hiccup and his friends arrive on the backs of dragons and shoot at the back of the Red Death's head. Hiccup instructs Snotlout, (riding a Monstrous Nightmare), and Fishlegs, (riding a Gronkle ), to go to the Red Death's blind spot and make noise to keep it confused while Ruffnut and Tuffnut, (riding a Hideous Zippleback), exhaust the Red Death's shot limit and Astrid, (riding a Deadly Nadder), drops off Hiccup so he can free Toothless. However it turns out Fishlegs and Snotlout can't find a blind spot due to multiple eyes on the side of its face but they continue to bash the shields, this works on the Red Death but also works on Fishlegs' Gronckle and Snotlout's Monstrous Nightmare. The Nightmare flings Snotlout onto the head of the Red Death while the Gronckle drops altitude. Fishlegs, before crashing, throws Snotlout his hammer which Snotlout uses to hit the Red Death's eyes so it doesn't step on Fishlegs. In the Red Death's thrashing about in steps on the boat Hiccup and Toothless are on and Toothless sinks a few feet below water. Hiccup still tries to save him but passes out from lack of air. Stoick, amazed at what Hiccup and his friends did and realizing his horrible mistake, dives down and saves them both. 
After apologizing to his son, he tells him he doesn't have to face the dragon, but with a smile, Hiccup replies, "We're Vikings: it's an occupational hazard", something Stoick said earlier in the movie. Telling Hiccup he's proud to have him as his son, Stoick watches as Hiccup climbs aboard Toothless and heads toward the Red Death. Astrid instructs the twins to get Snotlout off the Red Death's head which they do. However, Astrid is almost sucked in and eaten by the Red Death until Toothless and Hiccup stop it with a plasma blast. Astrid falls off her Nadder due to the force of the plasma explosion but Toothless catches her. After dropping her off, Astrid silently says "go".
Hiccup and Toothless anger the Red Death into following them using a powerful plasma blast. After leading it up high enough into the dark clouds, they hide among them and while diving past at high speed, repeatedly blasting hole after hole into the Red Death's wings. Enraged, the giant blasts a long stream of fire all around it, setting Toothless' prosthetic tail-fin alight when the Night Fury can't avoid the flames. Knowing they have little time left, Hiccup and Toothless dive nearly straight down, the Red Death in hot pursuit. When Hiccup hears the sound of the Red Death heating its gasses to fry them, he waits for the last possible moment, then shouts to Toothless; Toothless spins around and fires a plasma blast directly into the Red Death's mouth, prematurely igniting the gas and setting its insides on fire. 
Toothless twists away and slips past its head, as it realizes it's about to hit the ground. However, when it spreads its wings to stop itself, all the holes in its wings tear into even bigger holes, rendering its wings useless.
As the huge dragon crashes at full speed and explodes, Hiccup is knocked off unconscious when Toothless is unable to turn away from hitting the Red Death's tail after his prosthetic fin burned. Seeing Hiccup fall towards the flames beneath, Toothless dives into the inferno of the Red Death's exploding body to save him. After the smoke from the battle clears, it is shown Toothless survived, with his prosthetic fin destroyed and his saddle empty and burned. Everyone believes Hiccup was killed in the explosion, reducing Stoick to tears of complete remorse. He apologizes, saying how sorry he was for not listening to his son and for putting everyone in mortal danger. Toothless sees this and unfurls his wrapped up wings, revealing he has an unconscious Hiccup clutched to his body: his fire-proof dragonhide saved Hiccup's life.
After about three weeks, Hiccup wakes up in his bed, which has been placed on the main floor at home, surprised Toothless is in his house to joyfully greet him. As he gets out of bed, after being licked by Toothless, he discovers he lost his left foot and lower shin (as Toothless was unable to fully enwrap those parts with his wings), which was replaced by a prosthetic made by Gobber. After taking a moment for the feelings of sadness and loss to pass by, Toothless helps him walk outside and where both of them are surprised to see the Vikings invited the dragons to live in the village. Hiccup is welcomed back as a hero and Astrid punches him for "scaring her" and gives him a kiss on the lips. After Toothless is fitted with a new fin and saddle that Gobber built, Hiccup, Astrid, and the other Viking teenagers ride their dragons through Berk as the new age of a Viking and dragon alliance begins.
Five years after the Vikings of Berk made peace with the dragons, Dragon Riders participate in a race that involves sheep as points (known as Dragon Racing). Stoick notices his son's absence from the race.
Hiccup is on adventures with his Night Fury, Toothless, as they discover uncharted lands and new territories. Hiccup reveals to his girlfriend, Astrid, that he's been avoiding his father, who intends to make Hiccup the Chief of Berk due to his coming of age and his good deeds, which Hiccup is reluctant to accept.
During one of their adventures, Hiccup and Toothless discover a new, distant land. They, along with Astrid and Stormfly, meet a Dragon Trapper named Eret, son of Eret, who captures dragons for an insane conqueror named Drago Bludvist, whose goal is to take control of the dragons, and then the world. Hiccup tells his father of the encounter, and Stoick, remembering the Malevolence of Drago Bludvist, tells the village to ground all the dragons and prepare the island for war. Hiccup reacts strongly against this decision, desperate to prove he can change Drago's mind and prevent the coming war. Stoick tells him some minds can never be changed. 
Hiccup, Toothless, Astrid and Stormfly rush off against Stoick's commands, flying off to find Eret and his Dragon Trappers. Hiccup and Astrid find Eret on his boat, where Hiccup tries to show Eret he can change the trappers' minds about dragons. Before Hiccup shows Eret how incredible dragons truly are, he's interrupted by the rest of the gang attacking the ship and Stoick and Gobber boarding it. Stoick demands Hiccup return, revealing Drago slaughtered dozens of chiefs in the past, but Hiccup can not be convinced. He leaves claiming if he could change Stoick's mind about dragons, he can change Drago's. Astrid makes to follow, but Stoick puts his foot down. He has had enough mutiny for one day, and he orders her to lead the other riders back to Berk.
Hiccup and Toothless fly over a massive sea of clouds, and Hiccup vents frustration with his father by yelling angrily at the sky. He lays back on Toothless, patting him, and promises he won't let anything happen to the dragon. An ominous sound from below causes Toothless to look down at the clouds with a snarl. A figure rises beside Hiccup, who assumes it's his father before turning to see a bizarrely clad Dragon Warrior who apparently stands on the clouds. Hiccup tells Toothless to remain calm as the figure vanishes beneath the clouds, but within moments a massive Stormcutter erupts in front of Toothless with the strange rider standing on its back. The two dragons face off, beating the clouds around into a massive fog as they hover in front of each other. 
Another dragon rockets towards Toothless and rips Hiccup off of his back, leaving the Night Fury to plummet into the icy ocean below. Hiccup shouts desperately back at him and at the rider, begging the silent figure to go back and rescue Toothless from drowning. As Toothless struggles in the ocean, Seashockers notice him and pull him beneath the waves. All that is left is a hole in the ice and Hiccup's floating helmet. Hiccup is taken to a cavern full of dragons where the rider watches as Hiccup defends himself and pacifies the dragons using his fire blade, Inferno. The rider moves in.
Hiccup tries to get his captor to speak, but the warrior only whirls their staff around, summoning dragons to bring the soaking wet and exhausted Toothless into the cave. Hiccup runs up and hugs the dragon in relief, while the strange warrior cocks their head in curiosity. Hiccup's captor signals for the dragons in the cave to open their mouths like torches, filling the room with orange light. The figure approaches Toothless, and with a hands motion near his face, causes him to roll over in a trance-like state. The warrior reaches toward Hiccup's face and gasps upon seeing the scar on his chin.
The warrior calls Hiccup by his name in amazement, takes off her helmet, and reveals she is a woman. She stands erect and asks how it is possible after all the years, and Hiccup asks if he should know her. She admits he shouldn't, but as his mother, she could never forget him. Before Hiccup recovers from the shock, she tells him to follow her and rushes off into the maze of caves.
Hiccup's mother, Valka shows him an incredible Dragon Sanctuary, housing hundreds of dragons she rescued. She is surprised Hiccup isn't upset with her, but he has a hard time processing it all. Valka introduces herself to Toothless and marvels over him, asking how Hiccup bonded with him. Hiccup is forced to confess he shot the dragon down, but the two are clearly on good terms about it as Toothless happily bucks him onto his back. Valka asks what Stoick thought of Toothless, and Hiccup tells her Berk changed, which she isn't willing to believe. Valka explains how she once tried to speak out for the dragons but no one listened, and how in her hesitancy to fight them, she almost got both Hiccup and Stoick killed. That's why she stayed away after the dragons took her, and she claims it broke her heart to do so. Valka then shows Hiccup a gigantic sea dragon sleeping in the middle of the sanctuary. 
It's the Bewilderbeast, the Alpha Dragon, and the king of all dragons. He created the nest, and all the dragons are under both his care and command. Hiccup is awed by the massive, gentle creature, and Toothless bows his gaze to the Alpha in respect. Valka and Hiccup spend a great deal of time learning from each other, and she offers to let him stay with her there, claiming his identity could be found the same way she found hers. But Hiccup wants to find Drago.
Stoick and Gobber track Hiccup to this cave where they discover Stoick's wife is still alive; Gobber is so shocked at the revelation that he has to sit down. After the long-separated couple rekindles their love, they decide to return to Berk. Drago has also tracked them to the island and unveils his secret weapon -- another Bewilderbeast, but trained to be a warmachine. Eret betrays Drago and joins forces with the riders, before a titanic battle ensues and the two Bewilderbeasts face off. Drago's Bewilderbeast defeats the Alpha and kills him by goring his belly with his horns, thereby ending the fight by becoming the new Alpha and taking control over all the dragons, including Toothless, who now won't respond to Hiccup's command. Drago gives the order for the Alpha to kill Hiccup, and it sends Toothless. Drago leaves Hiccup to his fate as he prepares his now larger army for the invasion of Berk.
Stoick and Valka see Hiccup in trouble and both rush to rescue him. Toothless prepares to fire a fatal plasma blast at Hiccup while he pleads for Toothless to snap out of his trance but to no avail. Toothless fires the shot, but Stoick pushes Hiccup out of the way and is shot himself. Valka and the other Dragon Riders rush over to Hiccup and Stoick; after Valka listens to Stoick's chest, the look of sadness on her face reveals that the chief has passed away. Now, even Stormfly, Hookfang, Meatlug, Barf and Belch, Cloudjumper, Grump, and Skullcrusher succumb to the Alpha and join Drago's army.
The Bewilderbeast releases Toothless from its control, after which the Night Fury realizes what he did and attempts to help Stoick.
Hiccup, blinded by the loss of his father, yells at Toothless to leave. Toothless is under the Alpha's control again and Drago rides Toothless to lead the final invasion of Berk. Hiccup, Valka and the Dragon Riders hold a Viking funeral ceremony for Stoick. Hiccup, now filled with determination and regret at the loss of his father and the capture of his dragon respectively, decides they will fly back to Berk and defeat Drago once and for all.

The dragons on Berk behave weirdly and lose their free will as Drago and his Bewilderbeast arrive. Drago announces Stoick is dead and that no one is going to save them, then his Bewilderbeast freezes Berk. The Dragon Riders ride the baby Scuttleclaws to Berk as Hiccup learns from Valka earlier on that baby dragons aren't affected by the Bewilderbeast's control.

In the ensuing chaos, Hiccup and the Dragon Riders return to find Berk frozen as Drago's Bewilderbeast attacks the village.
Valka, Gobber, Astrid, Snotlout, Fishlegs, Ruffnut, Tuffnut and Eret work together to distract the Alpha while Hiccup confronts Drago and the brainwashed Toothless. Drago is surprised to see Hiccup still alive and orders Toothless to shoot Hiccup again, promising he won't miss this time. Hiccup attempts to break Toothless out of his trance stating he knows Toothless would never hurt him or his father and that he is his best Friend. After a little while, he succeeds, much to Drago's surprise, who immediately orders his Bewilderbeast to try to regain control of Toothless. Hiccup gets through to Toothless who throws Drago off his back. Drago falls onto his Bewilderbeast while Hiccup gets onto Toothless and flies him to safety before they could crash into the ocean.
After reaching the surface, Hiccup blindfolds Toothless to prevent the Alpha from controlling him again and Toothless trusts Hiccup to be his eyes. Drago orders his Bewilderbeast to shoot Hiccup and Toothless once more, and freezes the both of them in a big blast of ice, seemingly killing them. As Valka and the villagers of Berk grieve over their apparent deaths, Toothless, now glowing blue with plasma charge, breaks the ice, revealing he and Hiccup are safe.
Toothless, now with enhanced fire power, challenges the Alpha Bewilderbeast. The Bewilderbeast, being distracted by Toothless, loses control of the other dragons, who all join the people of Berk in a final standoff against Drago and his Bewilderbeast.
Enraged, Drago orders his Bewilderbeast to attack, but Toothless and all the other dragons: the ones from Berk, the ones from Valka's Sanctuary, and even Drago's own army of armored dragons, retaliate by firing at the Bewilderbeast simultaneously, blasting off Drago's metal arm. It tries to fight back with one last blast, but Toothless delivers the final shot that severely injures the latter, blasting off his left horn in the process. Toothless aggressively asserts his dominance; as Drago tries to hang on, the cowed Bewilderbeast retreats into the ocean as the villagers celebrate their victory. Hiccup and Toothless look down at where the Bewilderbeast dove, but see no sign of Drago. The dragons land around Toothless as Cloudjumper approaches him, then bows deeply, crowning him as Alpha of the dragons. All the other dragons follow suit as Toothless straightens to his full height in acceptance.
Eret jokingly teases Hiccup would make a great Dragon Trapper, to which Hiccup notes his father's Rumblehorn, Skullcrusher, now needs a new rider and thus offers Eret to bond with him.
Astrid is happy Hiccup finally found what he searched for, and they kiss. When Gothi the Elder directs him to a fallen brazier, he knows what she wants and nods: he kneels before her and she officially appoints him as chief.
Gobber proclaims that the chief has come home as the villagers cheer. As Hiccup does the closing narration, Berk is being rebuilt, Drago's dragons are freed of their armor and welcomed to Berk, and a monument in Stoick's honor is in the process of being chiseled out of the cliff outside the entrance of the Great Hall. After Hiccup and Toothless help deliver tools and materials for a roof repair, they join Eret and Skullcrusher and the others in the middle of a Dragon Racing practice match. The film ends with Hiccup proudly declaring, while others may have armies and armadas, Berk has their dragons.

One year after the events of the previous film, Hiccup continues to rescue dragons with his fellow Dragon Riders and friends. Even though he has fulfilled his dream of creating a utopia where humans and dragons live together, Hiccup still tries to save dragons and bring them to Berk while dreaming of finding the mythical 'Hidden World', a safe haven for dragons his late father Stoick told him about. Unfortunately, his efforts have also resulted in the island becoming severely overpopulated with dragons. Meanwhile, a white female Night Fury-like dragon, held captive by the Warlords, is given to the famed dragon hunter Grimmel the Grisly as bait for him to capture Toothless for the Warlords' use as an Alpha.
Toothless discovers the female Fury (dubbed a "Light Fury" by Astrid) in the woods around Berk, the two quickly becoming enchanted with each other; yet, the Light Fury senses Hiccup's presence (him having followed Toothless) and flees. Hiccup and Tuffnut later discover Grimmel's dragon traps in the woods. Grimmel visits Hiccup that night, but the latter has prepared an ambush to capture him; Grimmel manages to escape, burning Hiccup's house and many others in the process. Hiccup rallies Berk's citizens and dragons to leave Berk on a quest to find the Hidden World.
Mid-journey, the Berkians discover an island which they initially plan to rest on; soon, though, they decide to settle there, even if only temporarily. Seeing Toothless' inability to fly solo hindering his growing relationship with the Light Fury, Hiccup builds him an automatic tail. Upon receiving the tail, Toothless flies off, meeting the Light Fury on his own and flying with her to an unknown land. Valka, on a scouting patrol, notices Grimmel's approaching army, quickly reporting back to warn Hiccup. Hiccup and the Dragon Riders head to capture Grimmel; yet, they fall into his trap, barely escaping. Ruffnut, however, is captured but irritates Grimmel until he lets her go. Unknown to Ruffnut, she has accidentally revealed the Berkians' new location and Grimmel secretly follows her.
Hiccup and Astrid search for Toothless, finding the Hidden World and seeing Toothless and the Light Fury leading the dragons there as Alphas and mates. However, the two are soon discovered, Toothless being forced to leave and take Hiccup and Astrid back to the Berkians. Hiccup realizes his people wouldn't be safe living with dragons in the Hidden World, and moreover, have no business intruding upon the dragons' home. Suddenly, Grimmel, having followed Ruffnut, appears and captures Toothless and the Light Fury.
With Astrid's encouragement, Hiccup sets out with the Dragon Riders to stop Grimmel and his army and save Toothless, the Light Fury, and all the captured dragons. Gliding in on wingsuits, the group catch Grimmel's army off-guard, igniting a massive battle. Hiccup frees Toothless, while Grimmel drugs the Light Fury into obeying him. Hiccup and Toothless give chase; after a heated aerial duel, Grimmel tranquilizes Toothless midair. Hiccup, realizing he cannot save Toothless by himself, frees the Light Fury instead and asks her to save Toothless. Hiccup and Grimmel plummet to the sea with Hiccup fully accepting that this may be his end. The Light Fury, however, unexpectedly returns to save Hiccup, while allowing Grimmel to fall to his death.
The battle being over, back on the island, Hiccup fully realizes that the dragons will likely never be safe in the human world and that the Hidden World is where they truly belong. With great sadness, Hiccup and Toothless bid farewell to each other as all of the Berkians set their dragons free. Toothless and the Light Fury then lead the dragons to the Hidden World. Months later, Hiccup and Astrid get married as the Berkians settle permanently onto their new island. Afterwards, Hiccup, Astrid, Valka, Gobber, Eret, Tuffnut, Ruffnut, Snotlout, and Fishlegs stand at the edge of the cliff looking off towards the Hidden World wishing their dragons were there.

Years later Hiccup, Astrid and their two children, Zephyr and Nuffink, sail across the sea to visit Toothless, the Light Fury, their three offspring and Stormfly at the edge of the Hidden World; Hiccup vows that until mankind can coexist peacefully with dragons, the dragons will stay hidden while the Berkians guard their secret.

Hiccup Horrendous Haddock III
Hiccup is the inventive and compassionate son of Stoick the Vast, the Viking chief of Berk. Unlike other Vikings, he believes in understanding dragons rather than fighting them. His bond with Toothless, a Night Fury, changes the course of human-dragon relations. Hiccup matures into a wise leader who values peace, empathy, and innovation.

Astrid Hofferson
Astrid is a fierce and loyal warrior known for her bravery and determination. She is Hiccup's closest ally and eventual wife, supporting his vision for a dragon-friendly world. Astrid is fearless in battle but deeply cares for her friends and her dragon, Stormfly. Her discipline and trust in Hiccup make her a pillar of the team.

Stoick the Vast
Stoick is the gruff and traditional chief of Berk, initially wary of dragons. He is Hiccup's father and struggles to understand his son's unconventional approach. Over time, he comes to respect Hiccup’s leadership and vision. Stoick rides Skullcrusher, a Rumblehorn, and dies heroically in HTTYD 2.

Gobber the Belch
Gobber is a blacksmith, mentor, and comic relief figure who raised Hiccup like an uncle. He has a prosthetic arm and leg and a quirky outlook on life. Though rough around the edges, he’s wise and incredibly loyal. Gobber is one of the first adults to support Hiccup’s alliance with dragons.

Snotlout Jorgenson
Snotlout is arrogant and aggressive, often trying to prove himself in battle. He flies Hookfang, a Monstrous Nightmare, and is known for his loud bravado. Despite his ego, he cares about his friends and has moments of surprising maturity. He often flirts with Ruffnut, albeit unsuccessfully.

Fishlegs Ingerman
Fishlegs is a gentle giant with an encyclopedic knowledge of dragons. He rides Meatlug, a Gronckle, and is more interested in dragon stats than fighting. His intelligence and empathy make him an essential part of Hiccup’s team. He’s often anxious but dependable in critical moments.

Ruffnut and Tuffnut Thorston
This chaotic twin duo rides the two-headed dragon Barf and Belch. They constantly argue but are inseparable. Ruffnut is impulsive and occasionally flirts with danger (and enemies), while Tuffnut is absurdly confident in strange ideas. Together, they bring unpredictable energy to any mission.

Valka (appears in Movie 2)
Valka is Hiccup’s long-lost mother who lives among dragons in a hidden sanctuary. She’s a compassionate and skilled dragon rider who believes deeply in dragon freedom and care. After being separated from her family for twenty years, she reconnects with Hiccup and joins the fight against Drago. Her wisdom and bond with dragons inspire Hiccup to embrace his destiny.

Toothless (Night Fury)
Toothless is the last known Night Fury, intelligent, loyal, and incredibly fast. He forms a powerful bond with Hiccup and learns to trust humans. His retractable teeth and plasma blasts make him one of the most powerful dragons. Later, he becomes the Alpha of all dragons and discovers a mate: the Light Fury.

Stormfly (Deadly Nadder)
Stormfly is Astrid’s dragon, a sharp, agile Deadly Nadder with venomous tail spines. She is fiercely loyal and responds instantly to Astrid’s commands. With a bright blue body and sharp senses, Stormfly excels in aerial combat. She’s also affectionate and intelligent, capable of tracking enemies with her strong sense of smell.

Meatlug (Gronckle)
Meatlug is a bulky, brown Gronckle who belongs to Fishlegs. She’s slow but incredibly strong and surprisingly affectionate. Gronckles can digest rocks and spew lava-like blasts. Meatlug shares a calm, loving relationship with Fishlegs and often responds to his gentle tone.

Hookfang (Monstrous Nightmare)
Hookfang is Snotlout’s dragon, known for his fiery temper and ability to set his body ablaze. He’s aggressive, moody, and dramatic, but he has a deep bond with Snotlout despite their constant bickering. Monstrous Nightmares are large, intimidating dragons with powerful fire attacks. Hookfang often acts independently but ultimately listens to Snotlout.

Barf and Belch (Hideous Zippleback)
Ridden by the twins Ruffnut and Tuffnut, this dragon has two heads — one releases gas, and the other ignites it. The twin dragons mirror their chaotic riders, often bickering and behaving unpredictably. Coordination between the heads (and the twins) is key to their unique attack style. Despite their antics, they’re loyal and effective in battle.

Skullcrusher (Rumblehorn)
Skullcrusher is Stoick’s dragon, a strong and loyal Rumblehorn with excellent tracking ability. He has a nose like a bloodhound and is built like a tank. Skullcrusher’s stoic demeanor complements Stoick’s commanding presence. After Stoick’s death, Eret becomes his new rider.

The Red Death
The Red Death is a colossal dragon that lives inside a volcanic mountain, forcing other dragons to bring it food or face death. It is the hidden antagonist manipulating the dragon raids on Berk. Towering in size and power, it controls other dragons through fear. Hiccup and Toothless defeat it by working together, breaking the cycle of dragon servitude.


Valka’s Bewilderbeast (Movie 2)
Valka’s Bewilderbeast is a rare, ancient dragon known as a Titan Wing — a natural Alpha who rules through mutual respect with other dragons. Massive and ice-breathing, it creates icy structures and can control other dragons with its sonar-like roar. It peacefully watches over a sanctuary of dragons until it is challenged by Drago’s Bewilderbeast. Despite its strength, it is defeated and killed, demonstrating the brutal power struggle among Alphas.

Berk
A remote Viking island home to Hiccup and his friends, Berk evolves from a dragon-fighting village into a dragon sanctuary. It’s a rugged land of cliffs, mead halls, and stables.

The Hidden World
A luminous, secret sanctuary deep beneath the ocean where dragons live safely, untouched by humans. It’s discovered by Hiccup and Toothless in the third film.

Valka’s Sanctuary
A dragon refuge run by Hiccup’s mother, Valka, in HTTYD 2. It houses dozens of wild dragons under the protection of the Alpha Bewilderbeast.

Dragon’s Edge
An island outpost established by the Dragon Riders in the TV series to explore and protect dragons beyond Berk. It’s equipped with custom huts and launch towers.

Drago Bludvist
Drago is a ruthless warlord who seeks to enslave dragons and build a dragon army to conquer the world. He believes in ruling through fear and views dragons only as weapons. His Bewilderbeast overpowers Valka’s and becomes the new Alpha, seizing control of nearly all dragons. Hiccup tries to reason with him, but Drago’s cruelty leaves no room for peace, and he is ultimately defeated by Toothless.

Drago’s Bewilderbeast
This massive Alpha dragon is Drago’s key weapon, using its hypnotic call to control other dragons. Covered in ice armor and capable of freezing entire areas, it overthrows Valka’s Bewilderbeast in a brutal fight. Though it temporarily gains dominance, it is eventually outmatched by Toothless’s will and leadership.

Grimmel the Grisly
Grimmel is a cunning and sadistic dragon hunter obsessed with exterminating Night Furies. Unlike Drago, he uses intelligence and manipulation, setting traps and using drugged dragons called Deathgrippers to do his bidding. Grimmel views dragons as a threat to be wiped out and targets Toothless as the last of his kind. He nearly succeeds but is outmaneuvered by Hiccup and Toothless’s bond and bravery.

Deathgrippers
Venomous dragons used by Grimmel, the Deathgrippers are large, spiny, and lethal. Grimmel keeps them sedated with a mind-controlling venom, making them loyal and terrifying weapons. Their deadly tusks and firepower make them formidable in battle
