[Opening credits are shown. A silhouette of Toothless, a Night Fury, flies behind the Dreamworks logo.]

[We pan up and glide across the ocean to see an island surrounded by fog. The moment the island is shown, a boy speaks.]

Hiccup: This is Berk. It's twelve days north of Hopeless, and a few degrees south of Freezing to Death.

[We glide through the fog to see two giant Viking statues with fires burning in their mouths.]

Hiccup: It's located solidly on the Meridian of Misery.

[We go past the statues only to dive through a crashing wave and jump to a closer shot of the island. As we pan in a circular motion, we see several structures, houses, and a sheep farm.]

Hiccup: My village. In a word, sturdy. And it's been here for seven generations, but, every single building is new. We have fishing, hunting, and a charming view of the sunsets.

[We land on two sheep grazing in the grass.]

Hiccup (v.o): The only problems are the pests. (A dragon carries one sheep away. The other resumes grazing.) You see, most places have mice or mosquitoes. We have...

[A dragon fires at the screen as a door slams shut, a boy cowering behind it]

Hiccup: -dragons. Most people would leave. Not us. We're Vikings. We have stubbornness issues. (Hiccup runs outdoors, where all the houses are on fire and Vikings are tussling with dragons all around) My name's Hiccup. Great name, I know. But, it's not the worst. Parents believe a hideous name will frighten off gnomes and trolls. Like our charming Viking demeanor wouldn't do that.

[Hiccup is seen dodging several Vikings. A nearby explosion from the blast of a teal Gronckle causes him to trip and a male Viking roars in his face.]

Ack: ARGGGHHHHH! (suddenly cheery)Mornin'!

[Hiccup gets back on his feet and continues to run down the street, darting past his neighbors.]

Hoark: What are you doing here?!

Viking: Get inside!

Viking: What are you doin' out?"

Phlegma: Get back inside!

[A big viking grabs Hiccup protectively by the collar of his shirt, yanking him out of the path of a strafing dragon]

Stoick: Hiccup?! What is he doing out aga--?! What are you doing out?! Get inside!

Hiccup: That's Stoick the Vast. Chief of the tribe. They say that when he was a baby, he popped a dragon's head clean off of its shoulders. (Stoick throws a wooden cart at a dragon, knocking it out mid-air) Do I believe it? Yes, I do.

Stoick: What have we got?

Starkard: Gronckles, Nadders, Zipplebacks. Oh, and Hoark saw a Monstrous Nightmare.

Stoick: Any Night Furies?

Starkard: None so far.

[Burning embers land on Stoick's shoulder. He casually brushes it off.]

Stoick: Good.

Viking: Hoist the torches!

[Two enormous torches are raised and lit. The dragons swarm around them.]

[Hiccup runs into a blacksmith shop and puts on an apron]

Gobber: Ah! Nice of you to join the party! I thought you'd been carried off!

Hiccup: What, who me? Nah, come on! I'm waaaay too muscular for their taste. They wouldn't know what to do with all... (gestures to his skinny body) ...this.

Gobber: Well, they need toothpicks, don't they?

Hiccup: The meat-head with attitude and interchangeable hands is Gobber. I've been his apprentice ever since I was little. Well... littler.

[scene cuts to Stoick on the watch-tower]

Stoick: We move to the lower defenses. We'll counter-attack with the catapults.

[A dragon swoops down and sets another house on fire.]

Hiccup: See? Old village, lots and lots of new houses.

Viking: FIRE!

Astrid: Alright, let's go!

[The Viking teens are seen carrying buckets of water as Hiccup in the voiceover introduces them one by one]

Hiccup: Oh, and that's Fishlegs, Snotlout, the Twins, Ruffnut and Tuffnut, and... (dreamily) Astrid. Oh, their job is so much cooler. (Slow motion shot of the teens walking away from an explosion)

[Hiccup leans out of the smithing window to get a better look. Gobber lifts him up and back into the shop.]

Hiccup: Oh, come on. Let me out, please? I need to make my mark!

Gobber: Oh, you've made plenty of marks. All in the wrong places!

Hiccup: Please, two minutes. I'll kill a dragon. My life will get infinitely better. I might even get a date.

Gobber: You can't lift a hammer, you can't swing an axe, you can't even throw one of these!

[Gobber holds up a bola and a Viking grabs it and uses it to bring down a dragon]

Hiccup: Okay, fine, but this will throw it for me.

[Hiccup pats a wooden machine, which opens and shoots a bola randomly, hitting a Viking standing in the background.]

Viking: Arggh!

Gobber: See, now this right here is what I'm talking about!

Hiccup: Mild calibration issue--

Gobber: Don't you-- no-- Hiccup. If you ever want to get out there to fight dragons, you need to stop all... this.

Hiccup: But, you just pointed to all of me!

Gobber: Yes! That's it! Stop being all of you!

Hiccup: Ohhhh...

Gobber: Ohhhh, yes.

Hiccup: You sir, are playing a dangerous game. Keeping this much, raw... Viking-ness... contained? THERE WILL BE CONSEQUENCES!

Gobber: I'll take my chances. Sword. Sharpen. Now.

Hiccup: One day, I'll get out there. Because, killing a dragon is everything around here.

[The camera pans over various dragons as they are described. Nadders are shown attacking sheep, Gronckles are stealing racks of fish, and a Zippleback ignites a house and blows it up.]

Hiccup: A Nadder head is sure to get me at least noticed. Gronckles are tough. Taking down one of those would definitely get me a girlfriend. A Zippleback? Exotic. Two heads, twice the status.

Catapult Operator: They found the sheep!

Stoick: Concentrate fire over the lower bank!

Catapult Operator: Fire!

Hiccup: And then, there's the Monstrous Nightmare. Only the best Vikings go after those. They have this nasty habit of setting themselves on fire.

[A Monstrous Nightmare growls and alights itself as it climbs up the catapult]

Stoick: Reload! I'll take care of this.

[Stoick fights the Nightmare, which takes a few hits before retreating]

Hiccup: But the ultimate prize is the dragon no one has ever seen. We call it the--

[A high-pitched whistle is heard from the sky. The Vikings panic.]

Viking: NIGHT FURY! GET DOWN!

[From out of nowhere, an explosion tears the catapult apart]

Stoick: JUMP!

Hiccup: This thing never steals food, never shows itself, and... never misses. No one has ever killed a Night Fury. That's why I'm going to be the first.

Gobber: Man the fort, Hiccup. They need me out there!

[He attaches an axe to his arm and begins to run out, but turns around at the doorway.]

Gobber (cont.): Stay. Put. There. You know what I mean.

[Hiccup runs outside the fort, bringing his bolas launcher]

Viking #6: Hiccup, where are you going?!

Viking #7: Come back here!

Hiccup: Yeah, I know! Be right back!

[Hiccup is pushing a cart with the automated catapult on it]

[Stoick captures several Nadders in a net and wrestles them. One tries to blast him with fire.]

Stoick: Mind yourselves! The devils still have some juice in them!

[Hiccup sets up his bola catapult on an empty hill and looks around.]

Hiccup: Come on. Gimme something to shoot at, gimme something to shoot at.

[The camera pans around the night sky, and catches on a shadow, visibly blotting out the stars. It fires, and an explosion illuminates it, showing a visible shadow. Hiccup shoots, and a loud cry is heard as the shadow is seen plummeting down into a forest]

Hiccup (cont.): Oh, I hit it! YES! I HIT IT! Did anybody see that?

[A Monstrous Nightmare shows up and crushes Hiccup's bola launcher.]

Hiccup (cont.): Except for you.

[A shrill cry sounds from the hill, and catches Stoick's attention. He turns to see the Monstrous Nightmare chasing Hiccup, and gets up to go help him.]

Stoick: DO NOT let them escape!

Spitelout: Right!

[Hiccup runs behind a torch pole and hides, just as flames reach around the corner. He looks behind it and on the other side, the Nightmare reaches to get Hiccup. Stoick punches the beast and jumps back to defend himself. The dragon tries to breathe fire, but coughs up only a few drops of flaming liquid instead, having exhausted its shots]

Stoick: You're all out.

[Stoick promptly defeats the Nightmare, which quickly flees.]

Hiccup: Oh, and there's one more thing you need to know...

[The torch poll collapses and the torch starts to roll through the village, leaving destruction in it's wake.]

Hiccup: Sorry, Dad.

[The torch rolls onto the Nadders Stoick netted earlier, freeing them. The dragons manage to escape, hauling off most of Berk's food and livestock. With the raid over everyone turns there attention to Hiccup, it's like the entire island is looking at him.]

Hiccup: (sheepish)'Okay, but I hit a Night Fury.

[Stoick grabs Hiccup by the back of his shirt and drags him towards his house.]

Hiccup (cont.): It's not like the last few times, Dad! I mean, I really actually hit it! You guys were busy and I had a very clear shot. It went down, just off Raven Point. Let's get a search party out there, before it--

Stoick: STOP! Just... stop. Every time you step outside, disaster follows. Can you not see that I have bigger problems? Winter's almost here and I have an entire village to feed!

Hiccup: Between you and me, the village could do with a little less feeding, don't ya think? (A viking at the back rubs his stomach as if to say "Are you calling me fat?")

Stoick: This isn't a joke, Hiccup! Why can't you follow the simplest orders?

Hiccup: I can't stop myself. I see a dragon and I have to just... kill it, you know? It's who I am, Dad.

Stoick: You are many things, Hiccup. But a dragon killer is not one of them. Get back to the house. [To Gobber] Make sure he gets there. I have his mess to clean up.

Tuffnut: Quite the performance.

Snotlout: I've never seen anyone mess up that badly. That helped!

Hiccup: Thank you, thank you. I was trying, so...I really did hit one.

Gobber: Sure, Hiccup.

Hiccup: He never listens.

Gobber: Well, it runs in the family.

Hiccup: And when he does, it's always with this... disappointed scowl. Like someone skimped on the meat in his sandwich. [Imitating Stoick] Excuse me, barmaid! I'm afraid you brought me the wrong offspring. I ordered an extra large boy with beefy arms. Extra guts and glory on the side. This here, this is a talking fish bone!

Gobber: Now, you're thinking about this all wrong. It's not so much what you look like, it's what's inside that he can't stand.

Hiccup: [Sarcastically] Thank you for summing that up.

Gobber: Look, the point is, stop trying so hard to be something you're not.

Hiccup: I just want to be one of you guys.

[Hiccup enters his house and closes the door. Gobber gives a sympathetic look before leaving. A moment later, Hiccup exits through the back of the house and runs into the forest. The scene cuts to the Meade hall, where everyone is gathered]

Stoick: Either we finish them, or they'll finish us! It's the only way we'll be rid of them! If we find the nest and destroy it, the dragons will leave. They'll find another home! One more search. Before the ice sets in.

Viking: Those ships never come back.

Stoick: We're Vikings! It's an occupational hazard! Now who's with me?

Viking: Today's not good for me. I've gotta do my axe returns.

Stoick: Alright. Those who stay will look after Hiccup.

Phlegma: To the ships!

Spitelout: I'm with you, Stoick!

Stoick: That's more like it.

Gobber: Right, I'll pack my undies.

Stoick: No, I need you to stay and train some new recruits.

Gobber: [Sarcastically] Oh, perfect. And while I'm busy, Hiccup can cover the stall. Molten steel, razor sharp blades, lots of time to himself... what could possibly go wrong?

Stoick: What am I going to do with him, Gobber?

Gobber: Put him in training with the others.

Stoick: No, I'm serious.

Gobber: So am I.

Stoick: He'd be killed before you let the first dragon out of its cage.

Gobber: Oh, you don't know that.

Stoick: I do know that, actually.

Gobber: No, you don't.

Stoick: No, actually, I do.

Gobber: No, you don't!

Stoick: Listen, you know what he's like. From the time he could crawl he's been... different. He doesn't listen, he has the attention span of a sparrow... I take him fishing and he goes hunting for... for trolls!

Gobber: Trolls exist! They steal your socks. But only the left ones. What's with that?

Stoick: When I was a boy...

Gobber: Oh, here we go.

Stoick: My father told me to bang my head against a rock, and I did it. I thought it was crazy, but I didn't question him. And you know what happened?

Gobber: You got a headache.

Stoick: That rock split in two. It taught me what a Viking could do, Gobber. He could-- He could crush mountains, level forests, tame seas! Even as a boy, I knew what I was, what I had to become. Hiccup is not that boy.

Gobber: You can't stop him, Stoick. You can only prepare him. Look, I know it seems hopeless. But the truth is you won't always be around to protect him. He's going to get out there again. He's probably out there now.

[Scene cuts to Hiccup trekking through the forest]

Hiccup: Oh, the gods hate me. Some people lose their knife or their mug. No, not me. I manage to lose an ENTIRE DRAGON?!

[Hiccup encounters the Night Fury, bounded by his bola and takes out his knife. He is frightened and hides behind a rock, slowly approaching the fallen dragon.]

Hiccup (cont.): Oh, wow. I did it. Oh, I did it! This fixes everything! Yes! I have brought down this mighty beast!

[Hiccup steps on the seemingly dead dragon's face but it is still alive and shoves him away]

Hiccup (cont.): Whoa!


Hiccup (cont.): I'm going to kill you, dragon. I'm gonna cut out your heart and take it to my father. I'm a Viking. I am a VIKING!

[He hesitates, looking at the dragon's frightened eyes. The Night Fury, while visibly scared, makes no sound and lays still. Hiccup, unable to kill the defenseless creature, finally gives in.]

Hiccup (cont.): I did this.

[Hiccup begins cutting the ropes that bind the Night Fury.]

[The dragon stirs, opening its eyes. It rolls Hiccup over, roars in Hiccup's face, and lopsidedly flies away, leaving him unharmed.]

[Hiccup whimpers and faints.]

[Scene cuts to the Haddock household. Hiccup runs past Stoick and quickly and quietly crawls up the stairs, but Stoick notices him ]

Stoick: Hiccup.

Hiccup: (stops halfway up the stairs) Dad! Uh... I have to talk to you, Dad.

Stoick: I need to speak with you too, son.

Hiccup and Stoick: (simultaneously) I've decided I don't want / I think it's time you learn / to fight dragons. What?

Stoick: You go first.

Hiccup: No, no, you go first.

Stoick: Alright. You get your wish. Dragon Training. You start in the morning.

Hiccup: [Panicking] Oh, man, I should've gone first! Uh, 'cause I was thinking, you know, we have a surplus of dragon-fighting Vikings, but do we have enough... bread-making Vikings, or small home repair Vikings--?

Stoick: You'll need this. [passes Hiccup an axe]

Hiccup: I don't want to fight dragons.

Stoick: Come on. Yes, you do.

Hiccup: Rephrase: Dad, I can't kill dragons.

Stoick: But you will kill dragons.

Hiccup: No, I'm really very extra sure that I won't.

Stoick: It's time, Hiccup.

Hiccup: Can you not hear me?!

Stoick: This is serious, son! When you carry this axe, you carry all of us with you. Which means you walk like us. You talk like us. You think like us. No more of... this.

Hiccup: You just gestured to all of me.

Stoick: Deal?

Hiccup: This conversation is feeling very one-sided.

Stoick: DEAL?!

Hiccup: Deal.

Stoick: Good. Train hard. I'll be back. Probably.

Hiccup: And I'll be here. Maybe.

[Scene cuts to a pan around the Dragon Training Arena]

Gobber: Welcome to Dragon Training!

Astrid: No turning back.

Tuffnut: I hope I get some serious burns!

Ruffnut: I'm hoping for some mauling, like on my shoulder or lower back.

Astrid: Yeah, it's only fun if you get a scar out of it.

Hiccup: [Sarcastically] Yeah, no kidding, right? Pain. Love it.

Tuffnut: Oh, great. Who let him in?

Gobber: Let's get started! The recruit who does best will win the honor of killing his first dragon in front of the entire village.

Snotlout: Hiccup already killed a Night Fury, so, does that disqualify him or...?

Tuffnut: Can I transfer to the class with the cool Vikings?

Gobber: [to Hiccup] Don't worry. You're small and you're weak. That'll make you less of a target! They'll see you as sick or insane and go after the more Viking-like teens instead.

Gobber (cont.): Behind these doors are just a few of the many species you will learn to fight! The Deadly Nadder!

Fishlegs: Speed: eight; Armor: sixteen.

Gobber: The Hideous Zippleback!

Fishlegs: Plus eleven stealth times two.

Gobber: The Monstrous Nightmare!

Fishlegs: Firepower: fifteen.

Gobber: The Terrible Terror!

Fishlegs: Attack: eight; Venom: twelve!

Gobber: CAN YOU STOP THAT?! And... the Gronckle!

Fishlegs: [whispering] Jaw strength: eight.

Snotlout: Whoa, whoa, wait! Aren't you gonna teach us first?!

Gobber: I believe in learning on the job. [releases Gronckle, which promptly swallows rocks and starts blasting the teens]

Gobber (cont.): Today is about survival. If you get blasted... you're dead! Quick! What's the first thing you're going to need?

Hiccup: A doctor?!

Fishlegs: Plus five speed?!

Astrid: A shield!

Gobber: Shields! Go! Your most important piece of equipment is your shield! If you must make a choice between a sword or a shield, take the shield!

[All the recruits head for the shields]

Tuffnut: Get your hands off my shield!

Ruffnut: There's like a million shields!

Tuffnut: Take that one, it has a flower on it. Girls like flowers.

[Ruffnut takes the shield and slams it onto Tuffnut's head.]

Ruffnut: Oops, now this one has blood on it.

[The Gronckle flies towards the Twins and blasts their shield with a fireball, leaving them dazed on the ground.]

Gobber: Tuffnut, Ruffnut, you're out!

Ruffnut and Tuffnut: [Dazed] What?

Gobber: Those shields are good for another thing: noise! Make lots of it to throw off a dragon's aim!

[The remaining teens begin hitting their weapons against their shields, making the Gronckle shake its head, confused.]

Gobber (cont.): All dragons have a limited number of shots. How many does a Gronckle have?

Snotlout: Five?

Fishlegs: No, six!

Gobber: Correct, six! That's one for each of you!

[Fishlegs' shield gets blasted out of his hand. He runs away screaming.]

Gobber (cont.): Fishlegs, out. [to Hiccup hiding behind a plank] Hiccup, get in there!

Snotlout: [to Astrid] So, anyway I'm moving into my parents' basement. You should come by sometime to work out. You look like you work out!

[The Gronckle fires at Snotlout]

Gobber: Snotlout! You're done!

Hiccup: So, I guess it's just you and me, huh?

Astrid: Nope, just you. (runs away, leaving Hiccup)

[The Gronckle fires at them, but misses. Hiccup loses his shield and runs after it, the dragon hot on his heels]'

Gobber: One shot left! Hiccup!

[The Gronckle corners Hiccup, taking its aim. Gobber quickly tugs it away, causing it to misfire its last shot, and locks it up back in its cage]

Gobber (cont.): And that's six! Go back to bed, ya overgrown sausage! You'll get another chance, don't you worry. Remember: a dragon will always(turns towards Hiccup with a stern look)-- always -- go for the kill.

[Scene cuts to Hiccup trekking through the forest again]

Hiccup: [weighing the bola with his hands] So, why didn't you?

[Hiccup enters a cove, surveying its emptiness]

Hiccup (cont.): Well, this was stupid. (He finds some shiny black dragon scales on the floor. He picks one up.)

[The Night Fury swoops past him, but falls back onto the ground, trying to settle down on the cove. Hiccup hides at the entrance and tries to make a sketch of it]

Hiccup (cont.)Why don't you just... fly away?

[As he makes a sketch, he notices the Night Fury is missing one of its tail fins. He erases the fin on his drawing but he slips and drops his pencil, drawing the Night Fury's attention. It stares up at him in recognition.]

[Scene cuts to the Meade Hall]

Gobber (o.s.): Alright. Where did Astrid go wrong in the ring today?

Astrid: I mistimed my somersault dive. It was sloppy. It threw off my reverse tumble.

Ruffnut: [Sarcastically] Yeah, we noticed.

Snotlout: No, no, you were great. That was so "Astrid".

Gobber: She's right, you have to be tough on yourselves. Where did Hiccup go wrong?

Ruffnut: Uh, he showed up?

Tuffnut: He didn't get eaten.

Astrid: He's never where he should be.

Gobber: Thank you, Astrid. You need to live and breathe this stuff. The Dragon Manual. Everything we know about every dragon we know of.

[Thunder roars]

Gobber (cont.): No attacks tonight. Study up.

Tuffnut: Wait, you mean, read?

Ruffnut: While we're still alive?

Snotlout: Why read words when you can just kill the stuff the words tell you stuff about?

Fishlegs: Oh! I've read it like, seven times. There's this water dragon that sprays boiling water at your face. And--And there's this other one that buries itself for like a week--

Tuffnut: Yeah, that sounds great. See, there was a chance I was going to read that...

Ruffnut: ...But, now...

Snotlout: You guys read, I'll go kill stuff.

Fishlegs: Oh, and there's this other one that has these spines that look like trees...

Hiccup: So I guess we'll share?

Astrid: Read it.

[The teens leave Hiccup alone in the hall.]

Hiccup: All mine then. Wow, okay. So, I'll see you, uh... [Door slams] tomorrow.

[He flips open the book, reading its contents]

Hiccup: Dragon classifications. Strike Class, Fear Class, Mystery Class.

Hiccup (cont.): Thunderdrum: This reclusive dragon inhabits sea caves and dark tide pools. When startled, the Thunderdrum produces a concussive sound that can kill a man at close range. Extremely dangerous, kill on sight. Timberjack: This gigantic creature has razor sharp wings that can slice through full grown trees. Extremely dangerous, kill on sight. Scauldron: Sprays scalding water at its victim. Extremely dangerous. Changewing: Even newly hatched dragons can spray acid. Kill on sight. Gronckle, Zippleback, The Skrill, Boneknapper, Whispering Death. Burns its victims, buries its victims, chokes its victims, turns its victims inside-out. Extremely dangerous, extremely dangerous, kill on sight, kill on sight, kill on sight... [flips to the Night Fury page. No picture or information is shown on the page.] Night Fury: Speed, unknown. Size, unknown. The unholy offspring of lightning and death itself. Never engage this dragon. Your only chance: Hide and pray it does not find you.

[Scene cuts to several longships gliding through fog]

Stoick: I can almost smell them. They're close. Steady.

Stoick (cont.): Take us in.

Viking: Hard to port... for Helheim's gate.

[The boats disappear in the fog. A sudden jumpscare shows dragons attacking.]

[Scene cuts to the Arena, in the middle of a training session]

Hiccup: You know, I just happened to notice the book had nothing on Night Furies. Is there another book? Or a sequel? Maybe a little Night Fury pamphlet?

[A Nadder fires at him]

Hicup: WHOA!

Gobber: Focus, Hiccup! You're not even trying!

Gobber (cont.): Today is all about ATTACK! Nadders are quick and light on their feet! Your job is to be quicker and lighter!

Fishlegs: AAAAAH! I'm really beginning to question your teaching methods!

Gobber: Look for its blind spot. Every dragon has one. Find it, hide in it, and strike!

Ruffnut: Ugh! Do you ever bathe?

Tuffnut: If you don't like it, then just get your own blind spot!

Ruffnut: How about I give you one?!

[The Nadder attacks the twins]

Gobber: Blind spot, yes. Deaf spot? Not so much. Heh, heh, heh.

Hiccup: Hey, so how would one sneak up on a Night Fury?

Gobber: No one's ever met one and lived to tell the tale. [Snapping] NOW, GET IN THERE!

Hiccup: I know, I know, but hypothetically--

Astrid: [Whispering] Hiccup! Get down!

Snotlout: Watch out, babe. I'll take care of this. [tosses hammer at Nadder, but misses]

Astrid: Hey!

Snotlout: The sun was in my eyes, Astrid! What do you want me to do, block out the sun? I could do that, but I don't have time right now!

Hiccup: They probably take the daytime off. You know, like a cat. Has anyone ever seen one napping?

Gobber: Hiccup!

[The walls start toppling as Astrid starts leaping from wall to wall, the Nadder behind her. Astrid jumps off the last collapsing wall, right onto Hiccup]

Astrid: HICCUP!

Tuffnut: Oooh! Love on the battlefield!

Ruffnut: She could do better.

Hiccup: Just... let me... why don't you...

[Astrid yanks the axe off Hiccup's shield and swings it at the Nadder]

Gobber: Well done, Astrid.

Astrid: [to Hiccup] Is this some kind of a joke to you?! Our parents' war is about to become ours! Figure out which side you're on.

[Scene cuts to at the cove.]

[Hiccup approaches with a fish, leaving his shield behind]

[The Night Fury creeps out from behind rock. Sniffs at Hiccup and the fish, slowly approaches, then retreats upon seeing Hiccup's knife. Realizing the dragon feels threatened, Hiccup kicks his knife into water. The Night Fury relaxes and quickly acts friendly, and slowly takes the fish from Hiccup's hand, revealing a toothless mouth]

Hiccup: Huh. Toothless. I could've sworn you had...

[Toothless' teeth suddenly pop out of his gums and he snatches the fish, chomping it in half]

Hiccup (cont.): ...teeth. (Toothless approaches, sniffing Hiccup) Uh, uh, no, no, no. I-I don't have any more.

[Toothless regurgitates half of the fish, and proceeds to direct Hiccup through biting and swallowing it. Toothless then tries to return Hiccup's smile. He then snarls and flies away when Hiccup reaches towards him. He ignites a small patch of dirt and sleeps on top of it.]

[After some time, Toothless sleeps, hanging upside down like a bat, and wakes up to find Hiccup drawing Toothless in the sand, Toothless then use a branch to 'draw' Hiccup in the dirt and becomes angry when Hiccup steps on his lines. Hiccup steps over the lines to finally reach Toothless. Hiccup offers his hand to Toothless while looking away, Toothless finally trusts Hiccup enough to touch his nose to Hiccup's hand. Toothless snorts and runs away.]

[Scene cuts to on top the watch tower at night]

Gobber: ...And with one twist, he took my hand, and swallowed it whole. And I saw the look on his face: I was delicious. He must have passed the word, because it wasn't a month before another one of them took my leg.

Fishlegs: Isn't it weird to think that your hand was inside a dragon? Like if your mind was still in control of it, you could have killed the dragon from the inside by... crushing his heart, or something.

Snotlout: I swear, I'm so angry right now! I'll avenge your beautiful hand and your beautiful foot. I'll chop off the legs of every dragon I fight. With my face!

Gobber: Un-unh. It's the wings and the tails you really want. If it can't fly, it can't get away. A downed dragon is a dead dragon. Alright. I'm off to bed. You should be, too. Tomorrow we get to the big boys. Slowly but surely making our way up to the Monstrous Nightmare. But who'll win the honor of killing it?

Tuffnut: It's gonna be me. It's my destiny. See?

Fishlegs: [Gasp] Your Mom let you get a tattoo?

Tuffnut: It's not a tattoo. It's a birthmark.

Ruffnut: Okay, I've been stuck with you since birth, and that was never there before.

Tuffnut: Yes, it was. You've just never seen me from the left side until now.

[After hearing what Gobber said about how a dragon is unable to fly with injured tail or wings, Hiccup heads to the forge late at night, and makes a new tail-fin for Toothless to replace the one the Night Fury lost.]

[Hiccup is back at the cove, with a basket of fish and the prosthetic fin.]

Hiccup: Hey, Toothless. I brought breakfast. I hope you're hungry. Okay, that's disgusting. Uh... we've got some salmon, some nice Icelandic cod, and a whole smoked eel.

[Toothless roars in fear at the sight of the eel.]

Hiccup (cont.): No, no, no, no! It's okay. (throws the eel aside) Yeah, I don't really like eel much either.

[Toothless starts to eat the fish. While he's distracted, Hiccup sneaks toward his tail.]

Hiccup (cont.): Okay. That's it. That's it, just stick with good stuff. And don't you mind me. I'll just be back here... minding my own business.

[Hiccup tries to attach the new tail-fin.]

Hiccup (cont.): It's okay. Okay... okay... There. That's not too bad. It works.

[Toothless stops eating and perks up, seemingly realizing he might be able to fly again]

[Toothless takes off with Hiccup literally on his tail. They head towards a rock wall]

Hiccup (cont.): Whoa! No! No! No!

[Hiccup quickly adjusts the tail fin and they dodge the wall]

Hiccup (cont.)
OH, MY-- IT'S WORKING! YES! YES, I DID IT!

[Toothless realizes Hiccup is on his tail and throws him off. Unable to steer the fin on his own, he then crashes into the lake.]

Hiccup: AAAAAGGGGHHHHH! Yeah!

[Scene cuts to Arena, in amiddle of another training session. The arena fills with a greenish fog, obscuring the dragon.]

Gobber: Today is about teamwork. Now, a wet dragon head can't light its fire. The Hideous Zippleback is extra tricky. One head breathes gas, the other head lights it. Your job is to know which is which.

Fishlegs: Razor sharp, serrated teeth that inject venom for pre-digestion. Prefers ambush attack, by crushing its victims--

Hiccup: [On edge] Will you please stop that?!

Snotlout: If that dragon shows either of his faces, I'm gonna-- there!

[Snotlout and Tuffnut drench Astrid and Ruffnut, thinking they were the Zippleback.]

Ruffnut: Hey! It's us, idiots!

Tuffnut: Your butts are getting bigger. We thought you were a dragon.

Snotlout: Not that there's anything wrong with a dragon-esque figure-- Ow!

[Astrid punches Snotlout in the face, and Ruffnut throws her bucket at Tuffnut, who is then dragged into the wall of smoke.]

Astrid: Wait. [A tail knocks them off their feet]

Tuffnut: (running out of the mist, screaming) OH, I'M HURT! I AM VERY MUCH HURT!

Fishlegs: Chances of survival are dwindling into single-digits now. [One of the Zippleback heads emerges from the mist. Fishlegs throws water at its face, and it angrily spews out some green gas.]

Fishlegs (cont.): Oh. Wrong head.

[The head sprays a large stream of green gas, and Fishlegs runs off screaming. The head turns its attention to Hiccup and the other head comes into view, spitting electrical sparks]

Gobber: Fishlegs! Now, Hiccup!

[Hiccup throws his water at the spark-spitting head, but it arcs short of the head and falls to the ground.]

Hiccup: Oh, come on!

[The Zippleback pounces, both heads snarling at Hiccup]

Gobber: Hiccup!

[Gobber runs in to go help him. But stops when he sees, to his amazement, Hiccup reversing the Hideous Zippleback back into it's pen. The other teens watch this completely transfixed.]

Hiccup: Back! Back! Back! BACK! Now, don't you make me tell you again! Yes, that's right! Back into your cage. Now think about what you've done.

[Hiccup opens his vest, revealing an eel hidden inside it.He throws the eel inside, causing the Zippleback to coward against the back wall of its cage. Hiccup then closes the gate and turns to see the teens and Gobber staring at him completely slack jawed, and Fishlegs drops his bucket in shock.]

Hiccup (cont.): Okay! So, are we done? Because I've got some things I need to, uh... Yep. I'll... see-see you tomorrow!

[Scene cuts to at the forge, Hiccup making a saddle]

[Scene cuts to at the cove, Hiccup presenting Toothless with the saddle]

Hiccup: Hey!

[Toothless playfully runs away from Hiccup.]

[Hiccup rides Toothless, tugging the prosthetic tail fin with a rope to change its position. The wind blows at them and they tumble backwards]

[Toothless crashes into a field of Dragon Nip and rolls in it comfortably.]

Hiccup (cont.): Whoa! [holds up Dragon Nip]

[Scene cuts to Hiccup still holding up the Dragon Nip, but at the Arena]

[Hiccup grounds a Gronckle during training by rubbing Dragon Nip on its nose.]

Fishlegs: What was that? Some kind of trick? What did you do?

Tuffnut: How'd you do that?

Ruffnut: It was really cool.

Fishlegs: Hey, Hiccup!

Snotlout: Hey, Hiccup, I've never seen a Gronckle do that before!

Hiccup: I left my axe back in the ring. You guys go on ahead. I'll catch up with you.

[Scene cuts to back at the cove]

[Hiccup puts Toothless to sleep by scratching him just below the chin.]

[Scene cuts back to at the Arena]

[Hiccup then puts the Deadly Nadder to sleep the same way during training.]

Tuffnut: Hiccup, you're totally going to come in first, there's no question.

[Scen cuts to back at the cove]

[Toothless chases a shiny light that Hiccup creates using the sun and a hammer.]

[Scene cuts to back at the Arena]

Gobber: Meet the Terrible Terror.

[The cage is opened and the Terrible Terror is revealed to be only the size of a chihuahua. The teens laugh at the tiny dragon.]

Tuffnut: Ha! That's like the size of my--

[The dragon attacks Tuffnut.]

Tuffnut (cont.): AH! GET IT OFF! OH, I'M HURT! I AM VERY MUCH HURT!

[The Terrible Terror chases a shiny light created by Hiccup's shield back into the enclosure]

Tuffnut (cont.): [to Astrid] Wow, he's better than you ever were.

[Scene cuts to at the forest]

[Astrid sees Hiccup holding a harness while throwing her axe at the trees in the forest. Hiccup runs away and loses a furious Astrid.]

[Scene cuts to at the cove]

[Hiccup practices new tail positions with Toothless, when the rope snaps and bends the safety hook, leaving rider and dragon attached.]

Hiccup: Oh, great.

[Hiccup sneaks Toothless into the blacksmith shop to remove the connecting cord.]

Viking: Hiccup.

[Toothless throws a bucket and Astrid hears the noise.]

Astrid (o.s.): Hiccup? Are you in there?

Hiccup: Astrid. Hey! Hi, Astrid. Hi, Astrid. Hi, Astrid.

Astrid: I normally don't care what people do, but you're acting weird. Well, weirder.

[Hiccup is pulled through the shutter doors. Astrid tries to see what happened, but doesn't notice Hiccup flying away with Toothless.]

[Scene cuts to the docks the next morning. We see the fleet comes back to the island, or what's left of it at least. As all that's left is a single, battered longship with a couple of stragglers on board. As the Vikings come off the ship, they try to keep their heads high. Looking like a group of hometown heroes that got their butts handed to them. Stoick is the last to get off, his face is a mixture of sorrow and disappointment.]

Gobber: Well, I trust you found the nest at least?

Stoick: Not even close.

Gobber: Ah. Excellent.

Stoick: I hope you had a little more success than me.

Gobber: Well, if by success, you mean that your parenting troubles are over with, then... yes.

Phlegma: Congratulations, Stoick! Everyone is so relieved.

Starkard: Out with the old and in with the new, right?!

Hoark the Haggard: No one will miss that old nuisance!

Ack: The village is throwing a party to celebrate!

Stoick: He's gone?

Gobber: Yeah... most afternoons. But who can blame him? I mean the life of a celebrity's very rough. He can barely walk through the village without being swarmed by his new fans.

Stoick: Hiccup?

Gobber: Who would've thought, eh? He has this way with the beasts.

[Scene cuts to Toothless soaring across the ocean, Hiccup on his back]

Hiccup: Okay there, bud, we're gonna take this nice and slow. Here we go. Here we go... position three, no, four. Alright, it's go time. It's go time. Come on, buddy, come on, buddy! [changes tail fin position] Yes, it worked!

[Hiccup accidentally flies Toothless into one of the sea stacks.]

Hiccup (cont.): Sorry!

[Hiccup flies Toothless into another sea stack]

Hiccup (cont.): That was my fault.

[Toothless hits him with his ear]

Hiccup (cont.): Yeah, yeah, I'm on it. Position four, uh, three. Yeah! Go baby! Yes! Oh, this is amazing! The wind in my...

[The wind blows his cheat sheet out of his hand]

Hiccup (cont.): ... CHEAT SHEET! STOP!!

[Hiccup's diagram flies away and he tries to catch it, but unhooks the safety cord and falls. He tries to get back on the saddle, getting smacked with Toothless' tail in the process.]

Hiccup (cont.): NOOOOOO!!! Oh, gosh! Oh, gods! Oh, no! Alright! You gotta kind angle yourself! Okay, no, no, no... come back down towards me! Come back down-- YOW!

[Finally reattaching, the cheat sheet smacks into his face. Hiccup tries to memorize the sheet before smoothly swerving through rocks, swiftly changing tail positions.]

Hiccup (cont.): YEEAHHH! (Toothless shoots a blast of fire and flies through it) Ah, come on!

[Scene cuts to on a sea stack where Hiccup and Toothless are resting. Hiccup looks slightly singed by the fire earlier.]

[Toothless regurgitates a fish head for hiccup]

Hiccup: Uh... no thanks. I'm good.

[A flock of Terrible Terrors try to steal fish and Toothless tries to chase them away. One of them fights Toothless over a fish and loses. It tries to attack, only to be blasted in the mouth by Toothless, causing it to briefly inflate.]

Hiccup (cont.): Not so fireproof on the inside, are you? (He tosses the Terror a fish, which it swallows whole) There you go. Everything we know about you guys is wrong... (the Terror curls up next to Hiccup like a kitten, purring softly)

[Scene cuts to Hiccup's workshop.]

Hiccup: [sketching Toothless] Dad! You're back! Gobber's not here, so...

Stoick: I know. I came looking for you.

Hiccup: You did?

Stoick: You've been keeping secrets.

Hiccup: I... have?

Stoick: Just how long did you think you could hide it from me?

Hiccup: I don't know what you're...

Stoick: Nothing happens on this island without me hearing about it.

Hiccup: Oh?

Stoick; So. Let's talk about that dragon.

Hiccup: Oh, gods. Dad I'm so sorry. I was going to tell you. I just didn't know how to--

Hiccup (cont.): You're not... upset?

Stoick: What?! I was hoping for this!

Hiccup:Uh... you were?

Stoick: And believe me, it only gets better! Just wait 'till you spill a Nadder's guts for the first time! And mount your first Gronckle head on a spear! WHAT A FEELING! You really had me going there, son! All those years of the worst Viking Berk has ever seen! Odin, it was rough! I almost gave up on you! And all the while, you were holding out on me! OH, THOR ALMIGHTY! Ah. With you doing so well in the ring, we finally have something to talk about.

Stoick (cont.): Oh, I... brought you something. To keep you safe in the ring.

[Stoick holds up a Viking helmet and gives it to Hiccup]

Hiccup: [Sincerely] Wow. Thanks.

Stoick: Your mother would've wanted you to have it. It's half of her breast plate.

Stoick (cont.): Matching set. Keeps her close, y'know?

Stoick (cont.): Wear it proudly. You deserve it. You've held up your end of the deal.

Hiccup: I should really get to bed.

Hiccup and Stoick: Yes! Good! Okay. Good talk. See you back at the house. We should do this again. I'm great. Thanks for stopping by. Glad I stopped by, I hope you uh, like the hat. And for the... the breast hat.

Stoick: Well, uh... good night.

[Scene cuts to at the Arena]

Astrid: Stay out of my way! I'm winning this thing.


Hiccup; Good. Please, by all means.

Viking: You got it Astrid!

Astrid: This time! This time, for sure! AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAUGGGGGHHHHHHHH!

[Astrid sees the Gronckle on the ground, Hiccup standing beside it]

Astrid (cont.): NO! NO! SON OF HALF-TROLL, RAT-EATING MUNGE BUCKET!

Stoick: Wait! Wait!

Hiccup: So, later.

Gobber: Not so fast!

Hiccup: I'm kinda late for--

Astrid: What?! Late for what, exactly?!

Stoick: Okay, quiet down. The Elder has decided.

Gobber: You've done it! You've done it, Hiccup! You get to kill the dragon!

Stoick: Ha, ha! That's my boy!


Hiccup: [Sarcastically] Heh. Oh, yeah! Yes! I can't wait. I am so...

[Scene cuts to at the cove]

Hiccup: ...LEAVING! We're leaving. Let's pack up. Looks like you and me are taking a little vacation, forever. Ah, man... Aggh! What the-- What are you doing here?


Astrid: I want to know what's going on. No one just gets as good as you do. Especially you. Start talking! Are you training with someone?

Hiccup: Uh... training?

Astrid: It better not involve this!

Hiccup: I know this looks really bad, but you see...this is, uh... You're right! You're right! You're right. I'm through with the lies. I've been making... outfits. So, you got me. It's time everyone knew. Drag me back. Go ahead. Here we go.

[Astrid bends his arm backward, making an audible cracking noise, forcing him to the ground.]

Hiccup (cont.): OW! Why would you DO that?!

Astrid: That's for the lies.

[Astrid drops her axe handle on his gut]

Astrid (cont.): And THAT'S for everything else.

Hiccup: [In pain] Oh, man.

[Toothless comes from behind a rock, growling]

Astrid: Get down! RUN! RUN!

Hiccup: NO! No. It's okay! It's okay... she's a friend. It's okay. You just scared him.

Astrid: I scared him?! Who is "him"?

Hiccup: Astrid, Toothless. Toothless, Astrid.

[Astrid runs away, threatening to expose them]

Hiccup: Da, da-da! We're dead!

[Toothless leaves]

Hiccup (cont.): Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa! Where do you think you're going?!

[Astrid's running through the forest, Toothless suddenly swoops down and picks her up]

Astrid: AH! Oh, Great Odin's ghost! Oh, this is it!

[Toothless deposits her in a pine tree]


Astrid (cont.): Hiccup, get me down from here!

Hiccup: You have to give me a chance to explain.

Astrid: I am not listening to ANYTHING you have to say!

Hiccup: Then I won't speak. Just let me show you. Please, Astrid.

Astrid: Now, get me down.

Hiccup: Toothless, down. Gently. See? Nothing to be afraid of.

[Toothless blasts off the tree, Astrid sliding off his back]


Hiccup (cont.): WHOA!! TOOTHLESS! WHAT IS WRONG WITH YOU?! BAD DRAGON! He's not usually like this. Oh, no...Toothless, what are you doing?! We need her to like us. And now the spinning. Thank you for nothing, you useless reptile.

Astrid: Okay! I am sorry! I'm sorry! Just get me off of this thing!

[Toothless slows down and glides above the clouds slowly]


Astrid (cont.): Alright, I admit it. This is pretty cool. It's... amazing. He's amazing. So what now? Hiccup, your final exam is tomorrow. You know you're going to have to kill a... [Whispers to Hiccup so Toothless doesn't hear] kill a dragon.


Hiccup: Don't remind me.

[Toothless suddenly dodges]

Hiccup (cont.): Toothless, what's happening? Whoa, what is it?

[They find themselves in a middle of a flock of dragons. They are carrying food en masse toward the island.]


Hiccup (cont.): Get down!

Astrid: What's going on?

Hiccup: I don't know. Toothless. You've got to get us out of here, bud.

[Toothless ignores them]

Hiccup (cont.): It looks like they're hauling in their kill.


Astrid: Uh, what does that make us?

Hiccup: What my dad wouldn't give to find this.

[They approach the Dragon's Nest in a Volcano. Swarms of dragons throw their offerings into the lava below.]

Hiccup: [Sarcastically] It's satisfying to know that all of our food has been dumped down a hole.


Astrid: They're not eating any of it.

[A Gronckle delivers only a single tiny fish. A roar is heard from below and the Gronckle squeals in terror as something big seizes it]


Astrid What... is that?

[A colossal dragon emerges from the lava pit and eats the Gronckle alive. All the other dragons cower in terror before the giant creature.]


Hiccup: Alright, buddy, we gotta get out of here. Now!

[Toothless escapes and all the dragons flee. The Red Death lunges at Toothless but grabs a Zippleback instead. Toothless and his riders fly off to a beach and land.]

Astrid: No, it totally makes sense. It's like a giant beehive. They're the workers, and that's their queen. It controls them. Let's find your Dad.


Hiccup: No, no! Not yet. They'll... kill Toothless. Astrid, we have to think this through carefully.

Astrid: Hiccup, we just discovered the Dragons' Nest. The thing we've been after since Vikings first sailed here. And you want to keep it a secret?! To protect your pet dragon?! Are you serious?!

Hiccup: Yes.

Astrid: Okay. Then what do we do?

Hiccup: Just give me until tomorrow. I'll figure something out.

Astrid: Okay.


Astrid (cont.): [punches him] That's for kidnapping me.

Astrid (cont.): [kisses him] That's for... everything else.

Hiccup: What are you looking at?

[Scene cuts to at the Arena]

Stoick: Well, I can show my face in public again! If someone had told me that in just few short weeks, Hiccup would go from being, well... Hiccup, to placing first in Dragon Training... Well, I would've tied him to a mast and shipped him off for fear he'd gone mad. Yes! And you know it! But here we are. And no one's more surprised...or more proud than I am. Today, my boy becomes a Viking. TODAY, HE BECOMES ONE OF US!


Astrid: Be careful with that dragon.

Hiccup: (Glances at Stoick) It's not the dragon I'm worried about.

Astrid: What are you gonna do?

Hiccup: Put an end to this.


[She eyes him, dubious.]

Hiccup (cont.): I have to try. Astrid, if something goes wrong... just make sure they don't find Toothless.

Astrid: I will. Just... promise me it won't go wrong.

Gobber: It's time, Hiccup. Knock him dead.

Tuffnut: Show 'em how it's done, my man!

[Hiccup enters the Arena and picks a dagger from the weapons stand]

Stoick: Hrmph. I would've gone for the hammer.


Hiccup: I'm ready.

[They release the Monstrous Nightmare. Hiccup approaches the Nightmare slowly, raising his hand like how he did to Toothless]

Stoick: What is he doing?

Hiccup: It's okay. It's okay. [throws helmet onto floor] I'm not one of them.

Stoick: Stop the fight.

Hiccup: No! I need you all to see this. They're not what we think they are. We don't have to kill them.

Stoick: I SAID STOP THE FIGHT! [slams hammer against the Arena railings, agitating the Nightmare] Out of my way!

[Frightened, the Nightmare attacks]


Astrid: Hiccup! HICCUP! [enters the ring]

[Meanwhile, at the cove, Toothless hears Hiccup's screams and races to the Arena]


Stoick: This way!

[Astrid escapes, but Hiccup is pinned under the Nightmare's claws. Suddenly, a resonating blast fires at the Arena's railing. Toothless jumps into the Arena. The smoke clears up, revealing the two dragons fighting]

Gobber: Night Fury!


Hiccup: Alright, Toothless, go. Get out of here!


Vikings: Night Fury!

Hiccup: Go! GO!

Viking: Take it alive!

Astrid: Stoick, no!

Hiccup: No, Dad, he won't hurt you!
Hiccup (cont.): No, don't! You're only making it worse! Toothless, STOP!
Hiccup (cont.): No! NOOOOO!
Viking: Get him!
Hiccup: No! Please, jus-- just don't hurt him! Please don't hurt him.
Stoick: Put it with the others!

Stoick: I should have known. I should have seen the signs.
Hiccup: Dad--
Stoick: We had a deal!
Hiccup: I know we did... But that was before... Ugh, it's all so messed up!
Stoick: So everything in the ring... A trick?! A lie?
Hiccup: I screwed up. I should have told you before now. Take this out on me, be mad at me, but please... just don't hurt Toothless.
Stoick: The dragon? That's what you're worried about? Not the people you almost killed?!
Hiccup: He was just protecting me! He's not dangerous.
Stoick: They've killed HUNDREDS OF US!
Hiccup: AND WE'VE KILLED THOUSANDS OF THEM! They defend themselves, that's all! They raid us because they have to! If they don't bring enough food back, they'll be eaten themselves. There's something else on their island, Dad... it's a dragon like--
Stoick: --Their island? So you've been to the nest.
Hiccup: Did I say nest?
Stoick: How did you find it?!
Hiccup: No... I didn't. Toothless did. Only a dragon can find the island.
Hiccup (cont.): Oh, no, no. Dad, no! Dad! It's not what you think! You don't know what you're up against! It's like nothing you've ever seen! Dad, please! I promise you that you can't win this one! No! Dad, no! FOR ONCE IN YOUR LIFE, WOULD YOU PLEASE JUST LISTEN TO ME!
Stoick: You've thrown your lot in with them. You're not a Viking. You're not my son.
Stoick (cont.): READY THE SHIPS!

[Before walking to the docks, Stoick staggers back, realizing the mistake he just made.]

Stoick: Set sail! We head for Helheim's Gate.
Stoick (cont.):  (to a chained Toothless) Lead us home, Devil.


Astrid: It's a mess. You must feel horrible. You've lost everything. Your father, your tribe, your best friend...
Hiccup: Thank you for summing that up. Why couldn't I have killed that dragon when I found him in the woods? It would have been better for everyone.
Astrid: Yep. The rest of us would have done it. So why didn't you?... Why didn't you?
Hiccup: I don't know. I couldn't.
Astrid: That's not an answer.
Hiccup: Why is this so important to you all of a sudden?
Astrid: Because I want to remember what you say, right now.
Hiccup: Oh, for the love of-- I was a coward! I was weak! I wouldn't kill a dragon!
Astrid: You said "wouldn't" that time.
Hiccup: Whatever! I wouldn't! Three hundred years, and I'm the first Viking who wouldn't kill a dragon!
Astrid: First to ride one, though. So...?
Hiccup: ...I wouldn't kill him because he looked as frightened as I was. I looked at him, and I saw myself.
Astrid: I bet he's really frightened now. What are you going to do about it?
Hiccup: Eh, probably something stupid.
Astrid: Good. But you've already done that.
Hiccup: Then something crazy!
Astrid: That's more like it!

Stoick: Sound your positions. Stay within earshot.
Viking #1: Here.
Viking #2: One length to your stern.
Viking #3: On your starboard flank.
Viking #4: Three widths to port.
Viking #5: Ahead, at your bow.
Viking #6: Haven't a clue.
Gobber: Listen... Stoick... I was overhearing some of the men just now and, well, some of them are wondering what it is we're up to here-- not me of course, I know you're always the man with the plan-- but some, not me, are wondering if there is in fact a plan at all, what it might be?
Stoick: Find the nest and take it.
Gobber: Ah. Of course. Send them running. The old Viking fallback. Nice and simple.
Stoick: Shhh.
Stoick (cont.): Step aside.
Viking: Bear to port.

Fishlegs (o.s.): If you're planning on getting eaten, I'd definitely go with the Gronckle.
Tuffnut: You were wise to seek help from the world's most deadly weapon. That's me.
Hiccup: Uh...
Snotlout: I love this plan!
Hiccup: I didn't...
Ruffnut: You're crazy! I like that...
Astrid: So? What is the plan?

Gobber: Ah. I was wondering where that went.
Stoick: Stay low and ready your weapons. We're here.

[At the arena, Hiccup has released the Monstrous Nightmare. He gently guides it toward Snotlout, who is scared and grabs a broken off spear head.]

Astrid: Uh-uh.
Snotlout: Wait! What are you--?!
Hiccup: Relax. It's okay... it's okay. [Snotlout bonds with the Nightmare]
Snotlout: Where are you going?!
Hiccup: You're going to need something to help you hold on.

[The teens glance at the three other dragons, all out of their cages]

[Meanwhile, back at the dragon's nest. The vikings are preparing for the fight of their lives, as Stoick goes over the battle plan with his generals]

Stoick: When we crack this mountain open, all hell is going to break loose.


Gobber: In my undies. Good thing I brought extras.


Stoick: No matter how this ends, it ends today.

[Stoick give the signal and catapults break a hole into the side of the mountain, Stoick walks up to the mouth of the hole and gives another signal. This time, a flaming ball of straw gets catapulted into the hole, revealing thousands of dragons inside. Stoick gives a battle cry and charges in, but not a single dragon attacks, instead they all fly away. Not even attacking all the vikings outside. Toothless looks on in dread, knowing very well what about to happen next.]

Gobber: Is that it?


Spitelout: We've done it! [ The vikings begin to cheer in victory. But Stoick's face is full of confusion. Why didn't any of them fight back? That was almost, too easy. Suddenly, the ground begins to shake. ]


Stoick: This isn't over. Form your ranks! Hold together!

[A loud roar is heard and the mountain starts to crack]

Stoick (cont.): Get clear!

[The vikings begin to run for there lives, as a giant dragon, about five times the size of the Vikings' ships, breaks out of the mountain.]


Gobber: Beard of Thor... what is that?

[The Red Death, a king of dragons. Bursts out of the nest. As Stoick (for the first time in this movie) look on with absolute terror.]

Stoick: Odin, help us.

[The Red Death roars furiously]

Stoick: Catapults!

[The vikings fire their catapults, but the rocks bounce off the Red Death's skin like they were nothing. He then crushes the catapults as if they were made of matchsticks.]


Viking #3: Get to the ships!


Stoick: No! NO!

[But it's too late. The Red Death realizes where their going and breaths out the largest fire blast the vikings have ever seen. Destroying all the ship in one fell swoop and trapping them all on the island in the process. We cut to Toothless, who's still stuck on the now burning and sinking ship.]


Gobber: Heh. Smart, that one.


Stoick: I was a fool. [To Spitelout] Lead the men to the far side of the island.


Spitelout: Right. Everybody to the far side of the island!
Stoick: Gobber, go with the men.
Gobber: I think I'll stay, just in case you're thinking of doing something crazy.
Stoick: I can buy them a few minutes if I give that thing someone to hunt.
Gobber: Then I can double that time.
Stoick: HERE!
Gobber: Oh, no, HERE!
Gobber (cont.): Come on! Bite me!
Stoick: No, me!
Hiccup: Ruff, Tuff, watch your backs! Move, Fishlegs!
Tuffnut: LOOK AT US! WE'RE ON A DRAGON! WE'RE ON DRAGONS! ALL OF US!
Hiccup: Up, let's move it!
Gobber: Every bit the boar-headed, stubborn Viking you ever were!
Hiccup: Fishlegs, break it down!
Fishlegs: Okay! Heavily armored skull and tail made for bashing and crushing! Steer clear of both! Small eyes, large nostrils! Relies on hearing and smell!
Hiccup: Okay! Lout, Legs, hang in its blind spot! Make some noise, keep it confused! Ruff, Tuff, find out if it has a shot limit! Make it mad!
Ruffnut: That's my specialty!
Tuffnut: Since when?! Everyone knows I'm more irritating! See?!
Hiccup: Just do what I told you! I'll be back as soon as I can!
Snotlout: Don't worry, we got it covered!
Fishlegs: Yeah!

Tuffnut: Troll!
Ruffnut: Butt-Elf!
Tuffnut: Bride of Grendel!
Fishlegs: Uh, this thing doesn't have a blind spot!

Hiccup: There!
Hiccup (cont.): Go help the others!
Hiccup (cont.): Okay, hold on. Hold on.

Snotlout: It's working!
Fishlegs: Yeah! It's working!
Snotlout: Agghh!
Fishlegs: I've lost power on the Gronckle! SNOTLOUT! DO SOMETHING!
Fishlegs (cont.): I'm okay! Less okay...!
Snotlout: I can't miss! What's wrong buddy? Got something in your eye?
Astrid: Yeah! You're the Viking!
Snotlout: Whoa!

Hiccup: Dad?
Hiccup (cont.): You got it, bud.
Stoick: Hiccup. I'm sorry... for-- for everything.
Hiccup: Yeah, me too.
Stoick: You don't have to go up there.
Hiccup: We're Vikings. It's an occupational hazard.
Stoick: I'm proud to call you my son.
Hiccup: Thanks, Dad.

Astrid: He's up! Get Snotlout out of there!
Twins: I'm on it!
Tuffnut: I'm on it first! I'm ahead of you!
Ruffnut: Hey! Let me drive!
Tuffnut: I can't believe that worked!
Gobber: Night Fury! Get down!
Hiccup: Did you get her?
Astrid: Go.

Hiccup: That thing has wings! Okay, let's see if it can use them!
Hiccup (cont.): Do you think that did it?
Hiccup (cont.): Well, he can fly.
Hiccup: Okay, Toothless, time to disappear! Come on, bud!
Hiccup (cont.): Here it comes!
Hiccup (cont.): Watch out! Okay, time's up! Let's see if this works.
Hiccup (cont.): COME ON! IS THAT THE BEST YOU CAN DO?!
Hiccup (cont.): Stay with me, buddy. We're good. Just a little bit longer.
Hiccup (cont.): Hold, Toothless... NOW!
Hiccup (cont.): No! NO!

Stoick: Hiccup! Hiccup! Son!
Stoick (cont.): Hiccup.
Stoick (cont.): Oh, son... I did this...
Stoick (cont.): I'm so...I'm so sorry...
Stoick (cont.): Hiccup! Oh, he's alive! You brought him back alive!
Stoick (cont.): Thank you... for saving my son.
Gobber: Well, you know... most of him.


(Some time later, Hiccup lies in his bed asleep. Toothless eagerly nudges him awake.)

Hiccup: Oh, hey, Toothless. I'm happy to see you too, buddy. [Toothless steps on his groin] OW! What-- Uh, I'm in my house. You're in my house! Uh... does my dad know you're in here?!
Hiccup (cont.): Okay, okay-- no, Toothless! Aw, come on...

(Suddenly, something is wrong. Hiccup lifts up his blanket, and all at once, it petrifies him and overwhelms him, all at the same time. Toothless jumps down to the floor. Hiccup hesitates on this. On the bare wooden floor, Hiccups wooly boot touches the floor, followed by a mechanical replacement, fashioned out of wood and metal. Toothless smells the prosthetic, and looks at Hiccup. He takes a deep breath and tries to walk with the prosthetic. It hurts. He falls but Toothless catches him.)
Hiccup (cont.): Okay... okay... Thanks, bud.
Hiccup (cont.): Toothless, stay here.
Snotlout: Come on, guys, get ready! Hold on tight! Here we go!
Hiccup: I knew it. I'm dead.
Stoick: No, but you gave it your best shot. So? What do you think?
Viking #1: Hey, look! It's Hiccup!
Viking #2: Hiccup, how you doin' mate?
Viking #3: It's great to see you up and about.
Stoick: Turns out all we needed was a little more of... this.
Hiccup: You just gestured to all of me.
Gobber (o.s.): Well, most of you. [Gestures to his metal leg] That bit's my handiwork. With a little "Hiccup Flair" thrown in. You think it'll do?
Hiccup: I might make a few tweaks.
Astrid: [Punches Hiccup] That's for scaring me.
Hiccup: What, is it always going to be this way? Cause...

[Astrid kisses Hiccup.]

Hiccup (cont.): ...I could get used to it.
Gobber: Welcome home.
Viking: Night Fury! Get down!

Hiccup: You ready?
Hiccup: This... is Berk. It snows nine months of the year, and hails the other three. Any food that grows here is tough and tasteless. The people that grow here are even more so. The only upsides are the pets. While other places have...ponies or parrots, we have... dragons!


[Opening credits roll, followed by a shot of the village of Berk in the daytime ]

Hiccup Horrendous Haddock III: (V.O.) This... is Berk. The best kept secret this side of, well, anywhere. Granted, it may not look like much, but this wet heap of rock packs more than a few surprises.

[On a cluster of sheep, hiding nervously between buildings as shadows of passing dragons race by. The group moves as one, receding into a shadowy alley, pushing one sheep out into the light. It's suddenly snatched and carried into the air!]

Hiccup: Life here is amazing, just not for the faint of heart. See, where most folks enjoy hobbies like whittling or needlepoint, we Berkians prefer a little something we like to call--

[WHOOSH, WHOOSH, WHOOSH! A wash of vibrant colors blurs by. Dragons Barrel past at a dizzying speed. Their riders swipe, kick, and roll into one another while they weave neck in neck between the houses, docks and revamped structures of Berk.]

Hiccup: DRAGON RACING!

Fishlegs Ingerman: WHOOOOOOO!

[Fishlegs, who is now 20 and even larger, rides Meatlug (his Gronckle dragon) who carries the sheep in her claws, until Snotlout, also 20, but every bit as juvenile, and Hookfang (his Monstrous Nightmare), side-check them steal their sheep.]

Snotlout Jorgenson: Oh, I'm sorry, Fishlegs! Did you want that?

[Fishlegs glares at Snotlout.]

Fishlegs: No, Snotlout! That was mine!

[Snotlout falls back toward Ruffnut and Tuffnut, who lag on their Hideous Zippleback, Barf and Belch.]

Snotlout: Here ya go, babe. 

[With a chivalrous grin, Snotlout tosses the sheep to Ruffnut. She snatches it with a sneer and a grumble.]

Snotlout: Did I tell you that you look amazing today? 'Cause you do. 

Ruffnut Thorston: (Disgusted) Ugh. Come on, Barf. It's starting to stink around here. 

[Barf starts to peel off, spewing gas. Tuffnut mocks Snotlout with a mugging grin.]

Tuffnut Thorston: Nope. Still hates you. Let's blow this place, Belch! Alright!

[Belch ignites the gas, sparking a flashy explosion, and leaving Snotlout behind in the smoke. As they rush past the main bleachers, Ruffnut drops her sheep into one of five baskets suspended over a chasm at the lap crossing. Each backboard bears an image of its corresponding dragon. The Barf/Belch basket filled to the brim with sheep. Presiding over the game, Stoick turns to the frenzied crowd.]

Stoick the Vast: Ha-ha! That's nine for the Twins, Astrid lags with three, and Fishlegs and Snotlout trail with NONE!

[Stoick eyes an empty basket at the far end, its backboard painted with an image of Toothless.]

Stoick: And Hiccup is... nowhere to be found. Hmmm.

Gobber the Belch: Scared him off with the big talk, didn't ya, Stoick?

[WHACK! Snotlout, still smoldering from the blast, gets clipped from behind. Astrid, rolls in, astride Stormfly, spirited and competitive as ever, and beautiful despite herself.]

Astrid Hofferson: What are you doing, Snotlout?! They're going to win now!

Snotlout: She's my princess! Whatever she wants, she gets!

Astrid: Ruffnut?! Didn't she try to bury you alive?! 

Snotlout: Only for a few hours!

Hiccup: (V.O.) Dragons used to be a bit of a problem here. But that was five years ago. Now, they've all moved in. And, really, why wouldn't they?

[The racers chase each other through a sprawling hangar and into a vast cave, teeming with colorfully painted dragon stables. They exit through the far side and circle back through the village, blasting past many of its dragon-friendly additions.]

Hiccup: (V.O.) We have custom stables... all-you-can-eat feeding stations... a full-service dragon wash... Even top-of-the-line fire prevention, if I do say so myself.

[In the village, a baby Gronckle sneezes, accidentally setting one of the Viking houses aflame. Astrid peels away from the other dragon racers, and yanks open a spout on the overhead network of aqueducts, dousing the flames with a surge of water. Back to Stoick, amused as he watches the racers round the island, searching for sheep. He turns to Gobber and nods.]

Stoick: It's time, Gobber. 

Gobber: Righty-ho! (Aloud, to the crowd) Last lap!

[A horn sounds. The racers all turn to each other, excited.]

Astrid: The Black Sheep! Come on, Stormfly! We can still win this thing!

Ruffnut: Come on, Barf!

Tuffnut: Let's go!

Fishlegs: Go, Meatlug!

[Gobber loads the Black Sheep onto a catapult.]

Astrid: Whooo-hooo!

Tuffnut: Let's go, let's go, let's go!

Gobber: (To the Black Sheep) This is your big moment. Have a nice flight!

[He pulls the trigger, launching the Black Sheep into the air. Astrid spots it and steers Stormfly into a steep climb toward it.]

Astrid: Up, up, up!

[In a flash, Fishlegs and Meatlug fly in and nab the sheep.]

Astrid: NO!

Fishlegs: YES! Good job, Meatlug!

[Fishlegs tosses his captured prize to Ruffnut.]

Fishlegs: Here you go, darling! Mine's worth ten!

Ruffnut: Yeah! The Black Sheep!

Astrid: (To Snotlout) You guys are fighting for Ruffnut?!

Ruffnut: I'm totally winning!

Fishlegs: We're winning together!

[She rams Barf into Meatlug, sending Fishlegs into an uncontrolled spin. He slams into Snotlout, sending their dragons tumbling head over tail. The crowd goes wild.]

Snotlout: Oh, no!

Ruffnut: Whoo-hoo! No one can stop me now!

Tuffnut: Except for me. We're attached, genius! Quit trying--

[He grabs at the sheep. Ruffnut fights back, inciting a tug-of-war.]

Ruffnut: Hey!

Tuffnut: --to steal all my glory!

[Astrid and Stormfly fly toward them. Astrid stands on Stormfly's back, keeping her balance.]

Stoick: Get 'em, Astrid!

Tuffnut: It's MY glory!

Ruffnut: Always ruining EVERYTHING!

Tuffnut: NO SHEEP, NO GLORY!

[Astrid leaps off of Stormfly, runs up Belch's spindly neck, and plucks the Black Sheep from the Twins' hands.]

Astrid: Gotcha! Ha-ha!

[She tumbles through the air onto Stormfly, sticking a perfect landing, the Black Sheep in hand.]

Tuffnut: Whoa!

Ruffnut: Astrid!

Stoick: Well played! Ha, ha, ha! (To the crowd) That's my future daughter-in-law!

Fishlegs: Whoo-hoo!

[Back to Astrid on Stormfly, eyeing the fast-approaching finish line, unaware as Fishlegs suddenly rams Meatlug into Stormfly, sending Astrid off-course. She recovers and sees Snotlout flying headlong toward her, war hammer cocked, aiming at Astrid.]

Snotlout: Uh, excuse me!

Astrid: Stormfly!

[Snotlout hurls his hammer. Astrid ducks and rolls Stormfly out of the way. The hammer catches Fishlegs in the face with a CLANG. The crowd collectively winces.]

Crowd: Oh!

[Astrid and Stormfly recover from their roll, loop over the water, and they blast past the finish line, dunking the Black Sheep into their basket! ASTRID WINS!]

Stoick: That's thirteen! Astrid takes the game!

[A shot shows two white sheep in the basket staring surprised at the Black Sheep's bottom]

[The crowd comes unhinged. Astrid flies over the crowd, basking in her victory.]

Astrid: Yeah! Ooh-ooh!

Hiccup: Yep. Berk is pretty much perfect. All of my hard work has paid off. And it's a good thing, too, because with Vikings on the backs of dragons, the world just got a whole lot bigger.

[The scene changes to a boundless sky. Vast. Clear. Crisp. And from it, a black speck rockets across the horizon. The image of unbridled freedom. Tucked into his riding position, Hiccup appears to be part of Toothless. They dip, roll and dive, over a sea teeming with Thunderdrums, pulling off daring maneuvers with honed refinement, making them seem effortless.]

Hiccup: Yeah!

[They jackknife, heading skyward, rolling and tumbling through the ethereal cloud-scapes and joining high-flying Timberjacks as they soar in formation. Hiccup is bound head-to-toe in a snug, aerodynamic flight suit -- an asymmetrical, functional design of leather and articulated plates. It has an air of Viking bike leather.]

Hiccup: What do you think, bud? Wanna give this another shot?

[Toothless grumbles in protest.]

Hiccup: Toothless! It'll be fine.

[With a click of a lever, he locks the pedals in the flared tail position. Hiccup then unhooks himself from the saddle.]

Hiccup: Ready?

[Toothless snorts unenthusiastically. Suddenly, Hiccup slides off of Toothless, peeling away from him like a skydiver from a plane, yelling as he plummets. Toothless dives after him. They spiral through the air, face-to-face. Toothless is having fun, despite himself. When he sees the ocean, Hiccup slips his forearms through a pair of tucked leather flaps, and yanks, unfurling sheets of leather as he extends his arms. They catch the wind, snapping like wings, and sending him gliding! Toothless unfolds his wings, too, catching up with Hiccup. The freedom is palpable. Hiccup and Toothless are, for the moment, the same. Feeling the same rush of adrenaline. Independently together. They plunge past cloud formations, splitting apart then crossing paths again.

Hiccup: This is amazing!

[A cloud layer washes past, exposing a towering rock formation, dead ahead.]

Hiccup: No longer amazing! Toothless!

[Hiccup tries to steer himself away, to no avail. Toothless pours on the speed, trying to catch Hiccup as he hurtles toward collision. His locked tail makes maneuvering difficult. He's unable to pull up at a steep enough angle.]

Hiccup: Oh, no! AHH!

[At the last second, Toothless BLASTS the jagged rocks just ahead of Hiccup, then wraps Hiccup in his wings as they fly through it. The obliterated peak rains down around them. Toothless emerges through the cloud of debris and hurtles into the trees of a neighboring peak. They tumble down the uneven terrain, coming to rest on a small plateau. Hiccup emerges from the cocoon of Toothless wings. He switches his prosthetic riding foot to his walking foot and stows his leather wings.]

Hiccup: That really came out of nowhere.

[The sea stack cracks and falls]

[Toothless grumbles]

Hiccup: We gotta work on your solo flying there, bud. That locked-up tail makes for some pretty sloppy rescue maneuvers, eh?

[Hiccup removes his helmet, revealing a 20 year old Hiccup framed by wild hair, complete with a Viking braid. He walks to the edge of the cliff, taking in the New land.]

Hiccup: Oh. Looks like we found another one, bud.

[An annoyed Toothless throws a small pebble at Hiccup's head.]

Hiccup: Oh, what? Do you want an apology? Is that why you're pouting, big baby boo? Well... try this on! [Hugs him, tries to wrestle with him] Ya feeling it yet? Huh? Picking up on all of my heartfelt remorse?

[Toothless playfully dangles him off the edge of a cliff.]

Hiccup: (Groans) Oh, come on. You wouldn't hurt a one legged-- AHH!

[Toothless laughs]

Hiccup: You're right! You're right! You win! You win! 

[Toothless falls backwards]

Hiccup: Whoa, whoa, whoa! [Playing with Toothless] He's down! And it's ugly! Dragons and Vikings, enemies again, locked in combat to the bitter--[Toothless pins Hiccup] --URFFF! 

[Toothless starts to lick him]

Hiccup: (Groans) Gaaaaagh! You KNOW that doesn't wash out.

[Toothless laughs and Hiccup splashes some spit on Toothless' face]

[Hiccup looks around at the new island he discovered and pulls out his map]

Hiccup: So what should we name it?

[Toothless chews at his armpit]

Hiccup: "Itchy Armpit" it is. Whaddya reckon, bud? Think we might find a few Timberjacks in those woods? The odd Whispering Death or two in the rocks? Who knows... maybe we'll finally track down another Night Fury. Wouldn't that be something? So, whaddya say? Just keep going?

[Toothless replies 'no']

[A dragon screech catches their attention. Astrid and Stormfly land on the island and enter the scene]

[Toothless runs over excitedly to greet Stormfly]

Hiccup: Afternoon, milady. Where have you been?

Astrid: Well, winning races. What else? The real question is... where have YOU been?

Hiccup: Avoiding my dad.

Astrid: Oh, no. What happened now?

Hiccup: Oh, you're gonna love this. I wake up. The sun's shining. Terrible Terrors are singing on the rooftop. I saunter down to breakfast, thinking all is right with the world and I get: [Imitating Stoick] "Son, we need to talk."

Astrid: [Imitates Hiccup] "Not now, Dad. I've got a whole day of goofing off to get started."

Hiccup: Okay, first of all, I don't sound like that. What is this character? And second... what is that thing you're going with my shoulders?

Hiccup: A truly flattering impersonation. Anyway he goes: [Imitating Stoick] "You're the pride of Berk, son, and I couldn't be prouder..."

Astrid: [Imitates Hiccup talking to his dad] "Aw, thanks, Dad. I'm pretty impressed with myself, too."

Hiccup: [Laughing] WHEN have I ever done that with my hands?

Astrid: You just did.

Hiccup: Okay... just... hold still. It's very serious.

Hiccup: "You're all grown up, and since no chief could ask for a better successor, I've decided--"

Astrid: [Cuts Hiccup off; excited] TO MAKE YOU CHIEF! Oh, my gods! Hiccup, that's amazing! [Punches him hard in the chest]

[Hiccup's fin pops out. Hiccup grunts and Astrid laughs.]

Hiccup: [winds the fin back into his flight suit] You're gonna wear out the spring coil. The calibration is very sensitive! 

[Toothless and Stormfly come running past chasing each other and knock over Astrid and Hiccup]

Hiccup: Yeah, so... this is what I'm dealing with.

Astrid: What did you tell him?

Hiccup: I didn't. By the time he turned around, I was gone.

Astrid: Well, it's a lot of responsibility. The map will have to wait for sure, and I'll need to fly Toothless, since you'll be too busy... 

[Astrid realizes what she just said]

Hiccup: It's not me, Astrid. All those speeches, and planning, and running the village... that's his thing. 

Astrid: I think you're missing the point. I mean, chief. What an honor. I'd be pretty excited.

Hiccup: I'm not like you. You know exactly who you are. You always have. But... I'm still looking. I know that I'm not my father... and I never met my mother.... so, what does that make me?

[Hiccup sits down and gazes off into space. Astrid sits down beside him and starts braiding his hair]

Astrid: What you're searching for... isn't out there, Hiccup. [Puts her hand to Hiccup's chest] It's in here. Maybe you just don't see it yet.

[Astrid kisses Hiccup's cheek but pulls back with Toothless' spit on her face. Disgusted, she tries to wipe it off.]

Hiccup: Maybe. But, y'know... there is something out there.

Astrid: Hiccup...

[He grabs Astrid's chin and points her straight ahead of them, showing her a large cloud of smoke.]

[They fly towards it to investigate it. They fly through the burnt forest until they reach the ocean and see a large and piercing structure of ice, with large protruding spiky icicles.]

Hiccup: (To Astrid) Stay close.

[They fly around the ice, looking at all the ruined things caught in it, including ships, boats, and the remains of a wooden fort.]

Hiccup: What happened here?

[Toothless finds a pair of enormous footprints in the mud and makes a stressed sound.]

Hiccup: Easy, bud.

Astrid: Hiccup!

Eret, Son of Eret: Fire!

Hiccup: Astrid! Look out!

[A net is thrown at Toothless but catches Stormfly instead.]

Astrid: HICCUP!

[She slips from Stormfly and falls towards the ground. Toothless catches her]

[Dragon hunters try to trap Stormfly. She escapes the net and throws spikes.]

Eret: Watch the tail! Tie those legs up!

[Toothless flies past, and Eret looks at him in wonder]

Eret: Is that what I think it is?

Hiccup: STOP!

Teeny: Get out of the way!

Astrid: STORMFLY!

Ug: Whoa, watch out!

[Toothless, Hiccup and Astrid land]

Astrid: What are you doing?

[Hiccup opens Inferno, while Astrid grabs a stick]

Eret: Back again? Soil my britches... that is a Night Fury. Thought they were all gone for good. Looks like our luck's had a turn for the better, lads! Don't think Drago has one of those in his dragon army.

Astrid: Dragon army?

Hiccup: Look, we don't want any trouble.

Eret: Ha! You should've thought of that before you stole all of our dragons and blasted our fort to bits! 

Teeny: Yeah, look at it! 

Hiccup: Wait... 

Astrid: What are you talking about?

Hiccup: You think we did this?

Eret: Dragon trapping is hard enough work as it is, without do-gooder dragon riders sneaking in to rescue them.

Hiccup: What do-gooder-- there are other dragon riders?

Eret: You mean, other than your thieving friend from last night? You tell me. You may have an ice-spitting dragon on your side, but we still have a quota to fill. How do you suppose we explain this mess to Drago Bludvist?

Hiccup: Drago what-fist? Does anything you say make sense?

Teeny: He's expecting a new shipment of dragons for his army by tomorrow.

No-Name: And Drago don't take well to excuses.

Eret: This is what he gave me last time I showed up empty-handed.

[Shows a scar on his shoulder from under his shirt]

Eret: He promised to be far less understanding in the future.

Hiccup: Look, we don't know anything about a dragon thief, or an ice-spitting dragon,

[Eret nods to his men hidden behind Hiccup and Astrid]

Hiccup: Or your lunatic boss and his dragon army, okay? Just give us back our dragon and we'll go, Strange-Hostile-Person-Whom-We've-Never-Met.

Eret: Oh, where are my manners? I'm Eret. Son of Eret. Finest dragon trapper alive. After all, it's not just anyone who can capture a Night Fury.

[Toothless roars]

Hiccup: And this is Toothless. He says we're going. Now.

Eret: [Laughs] Heh. They all say that. RUSH 'EM, LADS!

[The hidden dragon trappers attack. Toothless fires at a large icicle that falls on the dragon trappers and keeps them back. They shout and jump away.]

Ug: Oh, Watch out!

[Hiccup pulls out Inferno and cuts the net off of Stormfly.]

Astrid: Stormfly! C'mon, go! Go!

[Astrid barely manages to escape on Stormfly, with Toothless and Hiccup following ]

Eret: YOU WILL NEVER HOLD ON TO THOSE DRAGONS, YOU HEAR ME?! DRAGO IS COMING FOR THEM ALL!

[Scene changes to Berk. The rest of the teens are flying around.]

Fishlegs: Come on, Meatlug! Woohoo!

Ruffnut: Yahoo!

[Snotlout flies near Gothi's hut, scaring her Terrible Terrors. Once they land he flies past again.]

[Gothi grunts and shakes her fist at them]

Snotlout: Ha-ha.

Stoick: (To villager) Hey, how are you?

Stoick: (To another villager) Beautiful day.

Stoick: [To Spitelout] Hello, Spitelout, great game today.

[Stoick nearly bumps into another villager]

Stoick: Oh, sorry, Mrs. Ack.

[Gobber is at his smithy doing dentist work on a Zippleback]

Stoick: (To Gobber) Any sign of him?

Gobber: Ah, he's probably flown off the edge of the world by now. You sure you want that kid running the village? You can still delay your retirement.

Stoick: Oh, he's ready. You'll see.

[Hiccup and Astrid arrive on their dragons]

Stoick: Haha! There he is! (To Gobber, proving his point) Huh? The pride of Berk!

Gobber: Who finally decided to show up for work. Yay. 

Hiccup: Sorry. Got held up.

Hiccup: Hey, Dad, could I have a word?

Stoick: Something you're itching to tell me?

Hiccup: Not quite the itch you're thinking of, but yes.

Stoick: Good man! Now, lesson one. A chief's first duty is to his people. So... (Calling out to villagers waiting for their saddles to be made) Forty-one?

Stoick: Forty--

Hiccup: Could we just talk in private for--

Starkard: That's me! That's me! I'm next! I was ahead of you! 

Hiccup: If we could just talk--

Starkard: Excuse me, I've been here all day! Okay, I want one of those high seaters, with lots of spikes and big stowage compartment.

Stoick: Absolutely! You got it, sir! 

Hiccup: Dad, this is actually a little more important than building saddles.

Stoick: Ah-ah! Lesson two. No task is too small when it comes to serving your people.

Hiccup: Dad.

Stoick: Oh, excuse us, Grump.

Hiccup: Look can we just talk?

Gobber: Grump! You let the forge die down again!

[Grump lights the forge spot on fire. Hiccup screams and Gobber groans before pouring water onto the fire.]

Gobber: That's it, Grump. You're going up for adoption! 

Stoick: One of these. And this...

Hiccup: DAD--

Stoick: There you go! Go on. Have away.

Hiccup: But, seriously, I really need to tell you about this new land we came across.

Gobber: Another one?! 

Fishlegs: Any new dragons?

Hiccup: We didn't stick around to find out. These folks weren't particularly friendly.

Gobber: Oh, really? Your Night Fury and Deadly Nadder didn't bring them cheering to the rooftops?

Hiccup: No, this was different. Not the standard run-for-the hills hoo-ha I've come to enjoy. These guys were trappers. Dragon trappers.

Astrid: You shouldve seen their fort. All blown apart and stuck in giant spikes of ice. It was weird. 

Hiccup: I've never seen anything like it. And worst of all, they thought we did it!

Gobber: Y'know, you two are gonna get yourselves in SERIOUS trouble one of these days. Not everyone appreciates this way of life.

Stoick: Gobber's right, son. Best we keep to our own. Besides, you'll have more important uses for your time. Ha-ha. [Turns on mechanical saw] Once we make the big announcement! 

Hiccup: [Turns off saw] They are building a dragon army. Or-or at least the guy they work for is. Uh, "Dargo Bloody Fist" or something. 

[Stoick's expression grows serious. He and Gobber exchange glances.]

Tuffnut: I'll bloody his fist with my face if he tries to take my dragon!

Ruffnut: Or mine!

Tuffnut: [Groans]You're such a moron.

Fishlegs: A beautiful moron.

Snotlout: Yeah... 

[Ruffnut groans in disgust]

Stoick: (suddenly serious and alarmed) Bludvist? Drago Bludvist?

Hiccup: Uh yeah. Wait. You know him?

[Inside the Dragon Hangar]

Stoick: GROUND ALL DRAGONS!

Hiccup: What? Why?!

Stoick: SEAL THE GATES! LOWER THE STORM DOORS!

Hiccup: Whoa, whoa, whoa. Wait! What is happening?

Gobber: You heard the man! Lock it down!

Stoick: No DRAGON or VIKING sets foot off this island until I give the word!

Hiccup: Because some guy you knew is stirring up trouble in some faraway land?

Stoick: Because Drago Bludvist is a madman. Without conscience or mercy. And if he's built a dragon army... gods help us all.

Stoick: Get them into their pens!

Hoark: Aye, Stoick!

Stoick: Quickly!

Hiccup: Then let's ride back out there. We'll follow those trappers to Drago and talk some sense into him.

Stoick: No. We fortify the island.

Hiccup: It's our duty to keep the peace!

Stoick: Peace is over, Hiccup. I must prepare you for war.

Hiccup: War? Dad, if Drago's coming for our dragons, we cant wait around for him to get here. Lets go find him and change his mind.

Stoick: Some minds won't be changed, Hiccup. Berk is what you need to worry about. A chief protects his own.

Stoick: SECURE THE STABLE! LATCH EVERY STALL! 

Astrid: Hiccup, dont!

Hiccup: I have to.

[Hiccup kisses Astrid's cheek]

Stoick: THIS WAY! QUICKLY! 

[Hiccup and Toothless blast past, heading for the exit.]

Stoick: HICCUP! 

[They try to fly through one door, but it seals shut.]

Hiccup: Come on!

[Toothless spins around and dives through the gap in the second lowering storm door.]

Stoick: Hiccup!

[Astrid and Stormfly blow past Stoick and slip through the storm door before it shuts, leaving Stoick fuming.]

[Eret's ship is seen sailing through the ocean.]

Eret: Keep your eyes peeled, lads! With this wind, we'll reach Drago by daybreak, so best we fill this ship up with dragons and quick! It's no time to be picky.

Ug: Uh...Eret?

Eret: Not if we want to keep our--

[Toothless and Stormfly are spotted flying towards them]

Eret: HEADS! OFF THE PORT QUARTER! Net em, lads! Take em down!

Teeny: Up on the left!

Eret: You're not getting away this time. Fire! [Net misses] Reload!

Teeny: Come on, reload! Incoming!

Eret: And here I was worried we might turn up empty-handed.

Hiccup: Nope. Its your lucky day. We give up.

Hiccup: That's one Night Fury, one Deadly Nadder and two of the finest dragon riders west of Luk Tuk. That oughtta make the boss happy, right? Excuse us.

Astrid: What are you doing?

Hiccup: Toothless, stay. The dragons dont really care for cramped spaces, so theyll just hang out with you. They wont be any trouble.

[The Dragon Trappers pull out their swords and spears. Startled, Toothless growls.]

Hiccup: Unless you do that. Wooden boat, big ocean-- How's your swimming?

No-Name: Not good.

[A burst of flame erupts from the live well, causing the crewmen to jump back. Hiccup thrusts Inferno through the grate.]

Hiccup: Oops. Almost forgot. Can't have armed prisoners.

[He retracts the blade and offers it up. Teeny cautiously takes it, looking it over.]

Astrid: How is this a plan?

Hiccup: Just what every Dragon Trapper needs. One end coats the blade in Monstrous Nightmare saliva.

[The pommel of the hilt is expelling green gas.]

Hiccup: The other sprays Hideous Zippleback gas. All it takes is a spark and...

[No-Name clicks the lighter, igniting the gas. Hiccup ducks as the sudden explosion sweeps over the deck.]

Hiccup: Oh, yeah, there you go! Once they see you as one of their own, even the testiest dragon can be trained, right, bud?

Eret: Give me that!

[Eret throws Inferno towards the ocean. Stormfly chases after it.]

Eret: What game are you playing? 

Hiccup: No game. We just want to meet Drago.

[Stormfly comes back with Inferno. Eret throws it the other way, and Stormfly chases it again.]

Eret: Why?

Hiccup: Because Im going to change his mind about dragons.

[Eret and his men laugh. Stormfly brings back Inferno again, asking to play fetch.]

Astrid: He can be really persuasive.

Hiccup: Once youve earned his loyalty, there is nothing a dragon wont do for you.

Eret: Puh! You wont be changing any minds around here.

[Stormfly asks the other crew to play fetch.]

Hiccup: I can change yours. Right here. Right now. [pushes Toothless' tail lever forward, spreading the prosthetic tail.] May I?

[Hiccup gets snatched by Snotlout. Barf and Belch slice through the port sail.]

Eret: Dragon riders!

[Toothless roars and climbs onto the top of the boat. Relaxed once he sees Snotlout, the Twins and Fishlegs.]

Hiccup: Put me down! Snotlout! What are you doing?

Snotlout: (To Ruffnut) See how well I protect and provide?

Tuffnut: Aggh! What is with all the nets?! 

Ruffnut: Hey watch it! That was close... (In slow motion) Oh, my. (stares lovingly at Eret's biceps) Me likey. Take me. 

[Hiccup pushes off Hookfang and glides back to the ship on his flightsuit.]

Astrid: HOLD YOUR FIRE!

[Astrid pushes Eret away from the net catapult as he fires, causing the net to barely miss Hiccup. Hiccup glides to the sail, grabs a rope and rides it down to the deck.]

Hiccup: WHAT ARE YOU GUYS DOING HERE?!

Gobber: Were here to rescue you!

Hiccup: I DON'T NEED to be rescued!

Stoick: ENOUGH! 

Eret: Well, didnt you just pick the wrong ship, eh? I am Eret, son of--

[Stoick shoves his face]

[Gobber hits him in the head and Grump drops on top of him, falling asleep and pinning him to the deck]

Eret: [Breathless] Get... this... thing... off... me! 

Gobber: Anyone else? Thats what I figured.

Stoick: You. Saddle up. Were going home.

Hiccup: No.

Stoick: Of all the irresponsible--

Hiccup: Im trying to protect our dragons and stop a war! How is that irresponsible?

Stoick: BECAUSE WAR IS WHAT HE WANTS, SON!

[Stoick realizes he has to explain.] 

Stoick: Years ago, there was a great gathering of chieftains to discuss the dragon scourge we all faced. Into our midst came a stranger from a strange land, covered in scars and draped in a cloak of dragon skin. He carried no weapon and spoke softly, saying that he, Drago Bludvist, was a man of the people, devoted to freeing mankind from the tyranny of dragons. He claimed that he alone could control the dragons and he alone could keep us safe, if we chose to bow down and follow him.

[Nearly everyone laughs]

Ruffnut: Stupid. 

Tuffnut: Good one.

Stoick: Aye. We laughed, too... Until he wrapped himself in his cloak and cried out, "Then see how well you do without me!". [echoed by Drago in flashback] The rooftop suddenly burst into flames, and from it, armored dragons descended, burning the hall to the ground. I was the only one to escape.

[The Viking teens are clearly disturbed by the story]

Stoick: Men who kill without reason cannot be reasoned with.  

Hiccup: Maybe.

Stoick: Hiccup... 

Hiccup: Im still going to try. This is what Im good at. And if I could change your mind... I can change his, too.

Hiccup: (To Toothless) Come on.

[Astrid climbs Stormfly.]

Astrid: Lets go.

Stoick: NO! Lead the others back to Berk. Ive had enough mutiny for one day.

[Ruffnut is lying on the deck, admiring Eret who is still pinned beneath Grump]

Ruffnut: (To Eret) Ooh, I like that.

Stoick: Ruffnut! 

Ruffnut: Ugh! Okay!

[Ruffnut plants an indirect kiss on Eret, who is completely disgusted.]

[Hiccup stares ahead, frustrated, as Toothless glides over a bed of clouds, glowing in the low, Arctic sun. Hiccup screams in frustration, then slumps back onto the saddle. Toothless recoils, sensitive to Hiccups upset.]

Hiccup: Dont worry, bud. Im not gonna let anything happen to you. I promise.

[The clouds start to tear from something and then a mysterious person appears to be flying in thin air.]

Hiccup: AW, COME ON, DAD! REALLY?! 

[Hiccup turns and realizes it's not his dad but a mysterious masked figure]]

Hiccup: (To Toothless) Okay. No sudden moves.

[The figure rises up, revealed to be riding upon a Stormcutter]

Hiccup: Hold on, hold on.

[Hiccup gets snatched by a dragon and Toothless falls]

Hiccup: Toothless!

[Toothless falls through ice and Hiccup gets carried away, Toothless watches and struggles to get out the water. As he splashes helplessly a trio of Seashockers carry him away.]

Hiccup: HEY! YOU LEFT MY DRAGON BACK THERE! HE CAN'T FLY ON HIS OWN! HE'LL DROWN!

[Hiccup is carried into the Dragons Sanctuary]

Hiccup: We have to head back for my dragon!

[Dragons surround Hiccup. Hiccup pulls out his fire blade, showing hes one of the dragons.]

[Hiccup draws a circle of gas and ignites it. Walking towards a dragon with an extended arm. The warrior steps forward and Hiccup recoils.]

Hiccup: Who are you? The Dragon Thief? Drago Bludvist? Do you even understand what Im saying?

[The warrior orders a dragon to bring Toothless]

Hiccup: Toothless! Its okay. Im glad to see you, too, bud. You really had me worried there.

[The warrior orders the dragons to light the place, approaches Toothless and puts him in a trance, then examines Hiccup. Hiccup gets nervous and turns his head a little, revealing the scar on his chin, which the warrior recognizes.]

Warrior: Hiccup? [takes off helmet, revealing herself as a middle-aged woman] Could it be? After all these years? How is this possible?

Hiccup: Uh, should I... should I know you?

Valka:: No. You were only a babe... But a mother never forgets.

[Hiccup stammers, tongue-tied, aghast.]

Valka: Come...

[Stoick and Gobber fly through a hailstorm]

Stoick: Boar-headed! Just like his mother! She could never stay put either.

Gobber: Ah, hes just twenty. And a Viking. I mean, could there be a worse combination? Ha! When I think of how stubborn and senseless YOU were back in the day... well, not much has changed, actually.

Stoick: You know what hes like. He wont give up, Gobber. And if Hiccup finds Drago, before we find him... 

Gobber: Bah! NOTHING can hurt Hiccup so long as that Night Furys around. Its a Night Fury!

[Stoick notices Hiccup's helmet floating in the water where Toothless fell. He grabs it.] 

Stoick: Find him, Skullcrusher. Find him.

[Skullcrusher sniffs the helmet and roars]

[Valka leads Hiccup through a maze of rock caves. He struggles to keep up.]

Hiccup: Hold on! Wait just a minute!

Valka: This way.

Hiccup: Come back here!

Valka: Come.

Hiccup: You cant just say something like that and run off! Youre my MOTHER?! I mean, what the -- do you grasp how INSANE it sounds?!

Valka: Come. Quickly! 

Hiccup: I have questions! Where have you been all this time? What've you been doing?! They said you were dead! Everyone thinks you were eaten by... 

[Hiccup goes through an opening, leading to the Dragons Sanctuary] 

[Hordes of dragons of various species fly around Hiccup as he stares in awe]]

[Hiccup looks up and sees Valka and Cloudjumper hanging on the cave roof]

Hiccup: This is where youve been for twenty years?

[Valka nods] 

Hiccup: Youve been rescuing them. [Nods again, this time, smiling] Unbelievable. 

Valka: Youre not upset?

Hiccup: What? No. I don't know. Its a bit much to get my head around, to be frank. Its not every day you find out your mother is some kind of crazy, feral, vigilante dragon lady.

Valka: At least Im not boring... right?

Hiccup: I suppose there is that... one... specific... thing...

Valka: Do you like it?

Hiccup: I dont have the words. 

[Toothless is seen surrounded by curious dragons who playfully approach and sniff at him; frustrated, he scares them off]

Valka: Can I...? 

Valka: Hes beautiful! Incredible! And he might very well be the last of his kind. And look, hes your age! No wonder you get along so well. And retractable teeth! Ah! How did you manage to--

Hiccup: I found him in the woods. He was shot down and wounded.

Valka: This Snafflefang lost his leg to one of Drago Bludvists iron traps. This Raincutter had her wing sliced by razor netting. And poor Gruff was blinded by a tree snare... then left to die alone and scared. And what of this? Did Drago or his trappers do this, too?

Hiccup: [Awkward laugh] Heh. Well, crazy thing is... Im actually the one who shot him down. (Valka looks on shocked but curious) Its okay though, he got me back. Right, bud? You couldnt save all of me, could you? You just had to make it even. So peg leg!

[Hiccup displays his prosthetic leg and he and Toothless laugh]

Valka: What did your father think of your Night Fury friend?

Hiccup: He didnt take it all that well. But then... he changed. They all did. Pretty soon everyone back home had dragons of their own.

Valka: If only it were possible.

Hiccup: No, really, I--

Valka: Believe me, I tried, as well. But people are not capable of change, Hiccup. Some of us... were just born different.


[Flashback starts] 

Viking: Hoist the torches! 

Valka: Berk was a land of kill or be killed, but I believed peace was possible. 

Stop! Youll only make it worse! It was a very unpopular opinion. 

[A dragon, Cloudjumper breaks into their home. Valka rushes in and grabs a sword.]

Hiccup! One night, a dragon broke into our house, finding you in the cradle. I rushed to protect you, but what I saw... was proof of everything I believed.

[Cloudjumper plays with Hiccup, but on noticing Valka, scratches Hiccup's chin while turning towards Valka.]

This wasnt a vicious beast, but an intelligent, gentle creature, whose soul reflected my own.

[Cloudjumper looks at Valka and playfully winks]

[Stoick throws an axe between Cloudjumper and Valka]

Stoick: Valka, run!

[Cloudjumper fires at Stoick and Valka tugs on him]

Dont!

Stoick: Hold on!

Valka: No! STOICK!

[Valka gets carried away]

Stoick: VALKA!

Valka: STOICK!

Stoick: [Whispers] Valka

[Flashback ends] 

Valka: You and your father nearly died that night, all because I couldnt kill a dragon.

Hiccup: Yeah, it runs in the family.

Valka: It broke my heart to stay away, but I believed you'd be safer if I did.

Hiccup: How did you survive?

Valka: Oh, Cloudjumper never meant to harm me. He mustve thought I belonged here... In the home of the great Bewilderbeast! The Alpha species. One of very few that still exist. Every nest has its queen, but this is the king of all dragons. 

[Valka shows Hiccup the center of the nest, where an immense, white dragon is asleep in a pool of water. Smaller dragons fly by and respectfully bow before the king.]

Valka: With his icy breath, this graceful giant built our nest. A safe haven for dragons everywhere.

Hiccup: Wait, thats the ice-spitter? Hes responsible for all that destruction?

Valka: He protects us. We all live under his care. And his command. All but the babies, of course... who listen to no one!

[The babies pester Toothless, and Cloudjumper scares them off. They land on the Bewilderbeast, who wakes up, gently blows them off and turns to face Valka and Hiccup.]

Valka: I've lived among them for twenty years, Hiccup, learning their ways, discovering their secrets...

[Valkas Bewilderbeast blows a puff of snow gently onto Hiccup's hair]

Valka: He likes you.

Hiccup: Wow.

Valka: You must be hungry.

Hiccup: Uh, yeah. I could eat.

Valka: Good. Its feeding time.

[Toothless tries to play with Cloudjumper, who is not amused by his antics.]


[The other riders are on a small iceberg.]

Astrid: I dont like it. They shouldve been back with Hiccup by now.

Ruffnut: I dont like it either. Eret, Son of Eret was the man of my dreams. My everything!

Snotlout: But, baby, I grew facial hair for you.

Fishlegs: Me too.

Astrid: What if Drago shot them down? What if...they need our help? We have to find them.

Fishlegs: W-wait, What? No, but Stoick said... 

Astrid: It doesnt matter what he said, if theyve all been captured. Come on!


[Eret's ship is seen on ice flows]

No-Name: Do we go back? 

Eret: Weve nowhere to go! Nothing to sell! And no heads to call our own, if we dont turn up with dragons and fast--

[Stormfly snatches him up]

Astrid: Careful what you wish for! 

Ug: ERET, SON OF ERET!

Eret: What is this?! 

Astrid: A kidnapping.

Ruffnut: Yay! Can he ride with me? Can he? Can he?

Tuffnut: [disgusted] Ugh!

Astrid: Youre gonna show us the way to Drago.

Eret: And help Dragon Riders sneak into Dragos camp? Just kill me now.

Astrid: That can be arranged. Stormfly, drop it. 

[Stormfly drops Eret from her clutches. Eret starts to fall towards the sea.] 

Astrid: Good girl! Stormfly, fetch.

Eret: ALL RIGHT! OKAY! I'LL TAKE YOU TO DRAGO! [Stormfly catches Eret]

Astrid: Works every time.

[Valka and Hiccup are followed outside the nest by all the resident dragons]

Hiccup: Hey, I thought we were going to eat!

Valka: Oh, we are!

[Hiccup looks down, and sees Seashockers herding a school of fish. The Bewilderbeast jumps out the water and catches the fish in his mouth, spitting them into the air for the dragons to eat.] 

Valka: Ha-ha-ha!

[Toothless swoops down, catching many of the fish as the dragons feast mid-air]

Hiccup: And from Dragon Island, I found this archipelago  

[Valka draws a map of the world in the snow. Toothless draws over it with an icicle, then it sticks to his tongue.]

[The dragons are hovering in an updraft. Valka dances from one dragon to another.]

Valka: When Im up here, I dont even feel the cold. I just feel

Hiccup: Free.

Valka: This is what it is to be a dragon, Hiccup. 

Hiccup: Its all well and good to call yourself a dragon. But can you fly?

[Jumps off Toothless. Gliding through the air with his flying suit]

[A small mountain appears in front of Hiccup]

Hiccup: Oh no. Toothless! 

[Toothless and Hiccup crashes in the snow.] 

Hiccup: Man! Almost! We just about had it that time! 

[Toothless sneezes, glares at Hiccup, then knocks his feet out from under him with a swipe of his tail.]

Valka: [Examining Hiccup's flightsuit] Incredible.

Hiccup: Well, not bad yourself.

Valka: All this time, you took after me. And where was I? Im so sorry, Hiccup. Can we start over? Will you give me another chance? I can teach you all that Ive learned, these past twenty years. Like

[She massages Toothless which causes him to reveal his hidden splitting fins.]

Valka: Now you can make those tight turns. 

Hiccup: Did YOU know about this?

Valka: Every dragon has its secrets. And Ill show them all to you. Well unlock every mystery, find every last species, together, as mother and son.

[Toothless, excited by the discovery, jumps around and then burrows through the snow, before popping out next to Cloudjumper and putting snow on his head. Cloudjumper then dumps the snow right back onto Toothless. Toothless shakes off the snow, and shows off his tail fins to Cloudjumper, who is unimpressed.]

Valka: This gift we share, Hiccup... it bonds us. This is who you are, son. Who we are. We will change the world for all dragons! We will make it a better, safer place! 

Hiccup: Yeah! I mean...that...sounds... amazing! [Valka hugs him] This is so great! Now you and I can go talk to Drago -- together.

Valka: What? Theres no talking to Drago.

Hiccup: But we have to--

Valka: No. We must protect our own. Now come on, we should be getting back.

[Toothless grins and examines his fins again.]


[The rest of the gang arrive at Dragos camp. They drop Eret in the snow. He tries to run, but Stormfly lands atop Eret.]

Eret: Agghh! Okay! I got you here, now get this thing off me! 

Astrid: Never take a toy from a dragon. Dont you know anything?

[Stormfly broods over Eret like a mother hen on an egg]

Eret: Gah! Why does this keep happening to me? 

Astrid: Whats down there?

Fishlegs: Large diameter bubbles, massive lungs, cold water deep dweller, Im thinking class five leviathan, maybe six.

[Dragos men tranquilize the dragons and capture the gang]

Fishlegs: Meatlug!

Snotlout: Hookfang!

Fishlegs: What's wrong, girl? 

Dragos Men: Dont move!

Eret: Drago! Get off me! Always great to see you, my friend! Keeping warm up here? Well, as you can see, Im right on time with a new batch of dragons, just like I promised. 

[Hookfang wakes up]

Soldier #1: He's waking up! 

[Hookfang hits one of the soldiers]

Soldier #1: Give me some backup here!

Soldier #2: Watch out!

Drago: Drop the ropes.

[Hookfang breathes fire on Drago, who shields himself with his cloak]

[Drago starts to scream, swinging his bull hook. Hookfang lowers his head to the ground and Drago steps on his snout]

Snotlout: Hookfang!

Ruffnut: Hey!

Astrid: What are you doing?

Drago: (To Hookfang) You belong to me now.

Eret: And as an added bonus, I also caught you their riders. No extra charge.

Astrid: What?! Are you kidding me?! 

Ruffnut: But you were so perfect!

Eret: Turns out, theres a whole bunch of them out there. They--

Drago: [grabs Eret to choke him] How many?

Astrid: Drago doesnt have them after all.

Drago: HOW MANY?! 

Astrid: Hundreds! A whole island full! 

Eret: I wouldnt worry about it. My men are hunting them down as we speak. They wont know where youre hiding. I promise you that.

Astrid: Oh, yes they will! [Drago drops Eret] They know were missing and they have tracking dragons. If you so much as touch us, Hiccup is gonna--

Drago: Hiccup?

Eret: Hes not a problem. Really. Trust me.

Astrid: Hes only the son of Stoick the Vast... his heir to the throne of Berk... and the greatest Dragon Master this world has ever seen! 

Drago: Dragon Master? I ALONE control the dragons! 

Tuffnut: Nope.

Fishlegs: Sorry! 

Astrid: And unless you let us go, right now, he will blast through here on his Night Fury and blow your entire fleet of ships to splinters! 

Ruffnut: Then theyll be crying like babies! 

Snoutlout: Funny and beautiful.

Fishlegs: Good one, babe! 

Tuffnut: Yeah. Like babies. They always cry. Real tiny ones... 

Drago: [Grabs Eret again] First there was one rider. And now all of Berk. And YOU lead them to me. [Throws Eret across the dock]

Eret: Drago! 

Drago: STOP ALL PREPARATIONS! WE MUST ATTACK THE DRAGONS RIDERS NEST AT ONCE! (savoring it) WE WILL TAKE DOWN THEIR ALPHA... AND THEN WE WILL TAKE BERK!

Eret: You're overreacting!

Drago: And get rid of him. 

Eret: Drago please... 

[One of Dragos men throws a weapon at Eret. Stormfly protects Eret from weapons.]

[Stormfly gets tranquilized.]

Astrid: STORMFLY! NO!

[Eret looks amazed that Stormfly tried to protect him.]


[Back in the Dragons Den.]

[Toothless is sleeping, suddenly awoken by baby Scuttleclaws.]

Hiccup: Well, bud, we cant wait around for Drago to attack this place. Weve gotta find him first.

[Toothless finds a baby Scuttleclaw nibbling on his tail.]

Hiccup: Lets go.

[Stoick sneaks up behind Hiccup.]

Stoick: Easy now.

Hiccup: Are you kidding me? How'd you get in here?

Stoick: The same way were getting you out. 

Hiccup: We?

Gobber: All clear! 

Stoick: Toothless. Come.

Hiccup: Dad! Theres something you need to know! 

Stoick: Yeah, yeah, tell me on the way. 

Hiccup: This isnt an on-the-way kind of update, actually... 

Stoick: Ive heard ENOUGH, Hiccup. 

Hiccup: ...more of the earth-shattering development variety.

Stoick: Yeah, just add it to the pile.

Hiccup: Dad, unlike most surprises I spring on you, this one youll like. I promise! You just have to handle it delicately, so.. 

Gobber: Uh, you might want to take this one. Oh, boy.

[Stoick draws his sword]

Hiccup: Dad, can you put the sword away... please? 

[Stoick sees Valka and drops his sword from shock]

Valka: I know what youre going to say, Stoick. How could I have done this? Stayed away all these years. And why didn't I come back to you? To our son. Well, what sign did I have that you could change, Stoick? That anyone on Berk could? [Stoick, still shocked, doesn't say anything through all this and instead slowly moves closer to Valka] I pleaded so many times to stop the fighting, to find another answer, but did any of you listen?

Gobber: [to Hiccup] This is why I never married. This and one other reason.

Valka: I know that I left you to raise Hiccup alone... but I thought hed be better off without me. And I was wrong, I see that now, but [nervously backs up against the wall; on the verge of tears] Oh stop being so stoic, Stoick. Go on... SHOUT, SCREAM, SAY SOMETHING! 

[Stoick touches Valka's cheek. She stares at him in fear.]

Stoick: [also on the verge of tears] Youre as beautiful as the day I lost you.

[Valka quietly weeps in relief; Stoick softly kisses her. A relieved and overjoyed Hiccup smiles.]


[Dragos ship sails, Drago striking a chain with his bull hook. At the stern, the riders and Eret are about to walk the plank.]

Snotlout: Could this day get any worse?

Tuffnut: Uh, let me see. You'll jump into freezing cold water and then die from drowning.

Eret: Looks refreshing. Please, ladies first.

Astrid: You are a steaming heap of dragon-

Eret: Duck. 

[Astrid ducks and Eret knocks Dragos soldiers unconscious and unchains himself.]

Soldier: Warn the others!

Ruffnut: Get em, you son of an Eret!

[Eret knocks out the rest.]

Ruffnut: Okay, I love you again.

[Snotlout looks hurt]

Tuffnut: Ugh. Pathetic. You can still jump.

Eret: So? Are we going to save your dragons and get out of here or not? [Astrid nods] Check every trap. Theyre here somewhere.

[Astrid checks a trap and finds Meatlug.]

Astrid: Meatlug?

Eret: Anyone coming?

Ruffnut: I dont know. You just keep doing what youre doing. Keep crankin'. (She admires his biceps.)

Eret: (To Stormfly) Thank you for saving my life. [Stormfly pushes her head to Eret's hand] Now let me return the favor.


[The dragons den]

Hiccup: Mom, youd never recognize it. Where we used to make weapons, we now build saddles, wing slings -- we even fix dragon teeth. You wouldnt believe how much everythings changed.

Stoick: Your sons changed Berk for the better. I think we did well with this one, Val.

Hiccup: Thanks, Dad.

[Valka drops the fish. Cloudjumper eats it before Toothless can.]

Stoick: Oh, ha-ha. I got it.

[Cloudjumper regurgitates some of it for Toothless.]

Valka: Im... a little out of practice.

Stoick: Well, y'know I didnt marry you for your cooking.

Gobber: I hope not, her meatballs could kill more beasts than a battle axe. Ive still got a few knocking around in here. Ha-ha.

[Gobber takes a bite, grimaces in disgust, and feeds the rest of his plate to Grump]

Hiccup: And once you move back in, with all your dragons, Drago wont stand a chance. Everything will be okay!

Stoick: Slow down, son. Its a lot to take in.

Hiccup: Oh, gotcha.

[Stoick begins to whistle "For the Dancing and the Dreaming"]

Gobber: Oh, I love this one!

Stoick: Remember our song, Val? Ill swim and sail on savage seas, with ne'er a fear of drowning. And gladly ride the waves of life, if you will marry me. No scorching sun, nor freezing cold will stop-

Gobber: Will stop me on my journey!-- Sorry. [Hiccup and Stoick both glare at Gobber]

Stoick: If you will promise me your heart... And love

Valka: And love me for eternity. My dearest one, my darling dear, your mighty words astound me. But I've no need of mighty deeds, when I feel your arms around me.

Stoick: But I would bring you rings of gold I'd even sing you poetry [Valka: Oh, would you?] And I would keep you from all harm If you would stay here beside me.

Valka: I have no use for rings of gold. I care not for your poetry. I only want your hand to hold.

Stoick: I only want you near me!

Stoick and Valka: To love to kiss, to sweetly hold. For the dancing and the dreaming. Through all life's sorrows and delights, I'll keep your love inside me. Ill swim and sail on savage seas, with ne'er a fear of drowning. And gladly ride the waves of life if you will marry me!

Gobber: Me-eee-e! Im still goin... [Hiccup elbows Gobber] I'm done.

Stoick: Ah... I thought Id have to die before we'd have that dance again.

Valka: No need for drastic measures.

Stoick: For you, my dear... anything. Will you come home, Val? Will you be my wife once again? We can a be a family! What do you say?

Valka: (laughs) Yes!

Gobber: Great! Ill do the cooking! (They all laugh)

Stoick: Thank Odin you didn't listen to me, son. We never would have found each other.

[Toothless growls.]

Hiccup: Toothless? Whats happening?

[The Dragons nest is under attack by Drago and his men.]

Hiccup: Oh, no...

Stoick: Val! Its all right, it's all right. Were a team now. Now what do you want to do?

Valka: We have to save the dragons.

Stoick: Aye. You got it! Come on, son.

Drago: Whatever comes, keep hitting the mountain! We need to draw the Alpha out.

Drago: Ready the traps!

[Zippleback gas surrounds one of the traps. The trapper shows surprise, then the gas ignites.]

Tuffnut: Surprise! Yeah!

Drago: WHAT?!

Astrid: (To Eret) You really are full of surprises. [jumps from Meatlug to Stormfly] Let's go!

Tuffnut: Dragon Riders coming through!

Fishlegs: Fire!

Snotlout: Ha-ha-ha!

Tuffnut: Woah-ho-ho! Yeah!

[Barf breathes gas over the traps, and Stormfly lights it. The trapped dragons escape from Dragos traps.]

Drago: CUT THEM DOWN!

[Ruffnut falls off Barf towards the ground.]

Ruffnut: Eret, son of Eret!

[Snotlout and Fishlegs catch Ruffnut.]

Astrid: Up, girl! To the left, Eret! Thats it!

Astrid: Look out!

[A large icicle falls towards them but is destroyed by a plasma blast.]

Hiccup: Yeah baby!

Dragos men: Take 'em down!

Gobber: Heads up!

[Grump uses his tail as a bludgeon to knock them unconscious.]

Gobber: Ho ho ho!

[Toothless flies past.]

Drago: Dragon Master.

Hiccup: [To Eret] Welcome aboard, Dragon Rider!

Eret: Thanks. I think.

Astrid: Where have you been?

Hiccup: Oh, y'know. Catching up with Mom.

[Valka, dressed in battle armor and riding on Cloudjumper, emerges from the sky and summons the Alpha who breaks his way out of the nest and roars]

Eret: Whoa...

Astrid: That's your mother?!

Hiccup: Well, now you know where I get my dramatic flair. [flicks helmet down and breaks right]

Drago: The Alpha! Now we have a fight!

[The Alpha freezes some of Dragos soldiers and traps.]

[Zipplebacks attack in balls of fire. One gets caught in a trap.]

Hiccup: There! Come on, Toothless! Show them what you got, bud.

[Toothless fires and frees the Zippleback.]

Hiccup: Thatta boy!

[Valka and Cloudjumper are shot down with a net and crash-land near Drago.]

Drago: I've waited a long time for this!

Valka: You cannot take our dragons! They are controlled by the Alpha!

Drago: Then it's a good thing I brought a challenger.

[Drago screams loudly, waving his bullhook. The water churns and ships are knocked over as a second Bewilderbeast, bigger than Valka's and shackled in chains, rises from the ocean.]

Hiccup: Another one?

Fishlegs: I WAS WAY OFF! THAT IS A CLASS TEN! CLASS TEN!

Valka: No.

Drago: Come on! Take down the Alpha!

Valka: No.

[Valka attacks Drago. Drago trips her and stands on her, about to kill her with his bull hook.]

[Stoick shoves him, saving Valka.]

Valka: Thank you.

Stoick: For you, my dear... anything.

[Stoick and Drago take up fighting stances as the two Bewilderbeasts roar loudly and strike their tusks together, signaling the start of their battle]

Stoick: Val, you think you can stop them?

Valka: I'll do my best! Come on, Cloudjumper!

Drago: You.. I watched you burn!

Stoick: It takes more than a little fire to kill me!

[The Bewilderbeasts begin to fight, as do Drago and Stoick.]

[Valka tries to stop them but fails. Valka's Alpha stops, but Drago's Alpha does not and shoves down the white Bewilderbeast]

[Drago hits Stoick to the ground. Gobber flies past.]

Gobber: Stoick!

[Gobber passes Stoick his prosthetic mace.]

[The two Alphas continue to ram heads. Dragos Bewilderbeast knocks over Valka's, and the riders can only watch in horror as the dark Alpha gores the white Alpha's belly with his tusks, killing him. ]

Valka: No!

Astrid: No.

[The new Alpha, standing over the corpse of the fallen king, roars loudly and takes control of the dragons.]

Drago: Weve won. Now finish her!

Stoick: No!

[The Bewilderbeast starts shooting ice at Valka and Cloudjumper.]

Stoick: Hold on! Skullcrusher, go! Come on, Gobber!

Gobber: Right behind ya, Stoick!

[A dragon knocks Valka, she falls. Valka struggles to hold onto Cloudjumper and finally falls. Stoick jumps and catches her.]

Hiccup: STOP! Stop! 

Drago: This... is the great Dragon Master? The son of Stoick the Vast? What shame he must feel.

Hiccup: All of this loss, and for what? To become unstoppable? To rule the world? Dragons are kind, amazing creatures that can bring people together.

Drago: Or tear them apart.

[He unhooks his prosthetic arm, showing Hiccup his stump. Hiccup is horrified.]

Drago: You see, I know what it is to live in fear. To see my village burned, my family taken. But even as a boy, left with nothing, I vowed to rise above the fear of dragons and liberate the people of this world.

Hiccup: Then why a dragon army?

Drago: Well, you need dragons to conquer other dragons.

Hiccup: Or maybe you need dragons to conquer people. To control those who follow you... and to get rid of those who wont.

Drago: (Laughs) Clever boy.

Hiccup: The world wants peace. And we have the answer, back on Berk. Just let me show you.

Drago: NO! Let ME show YOU.

[Drago summons his Alpha again.]

Stoick: What? Hiccup!

Stoick: Come on, Gobber!

Gobber: Okay, change of plans.

Drago: No dragon can resist the Alpha's command. So he who controls the Alpha, controls them all. 

[Drago commands the Alpha to take control of Toothless, who starts screaming and thrashing in pain]

Hiccup: Toothless? You okay, bud? Whats going on?

Drago: Witness true strength. The strength of will over others. In the face of it, you are nothing!

[The Alpha takes control of Toothless. His pupils shrink into frighteningly narrow slits and he turns on Hiccup.]

Hiccup: Uh, what did he just tell you? Toothless, whats the matter with you? What're you doing? Knock it off! Stop! Snap out of it!

[Stoick runs to Hiccup.]

Hiccup: Toothless! No! Toothless! Dont! 

[The mind-controlled Toothless charges a plasma blast, preparing to kill Hiccup]

Stoick: Hiccup!

Hiccup: STOP! 

Stoick: SON!

Hiccup: DAD! NO!

[Stoick jumps in front of Hiccup and takes the shot, being killed instantly.]

Hiccup: Dad!

Valka: Stoick...

Hiccup: No... you...

[Valka checks for a heartbeat but hears nothing.]

Hiccup: No.

[The Bewilderbeast turns away and stops controlling Toothless. His eyes widen once more as he comes to his senses, realizing in horror what he's done.]

Hiccup: No, no, no. No...

[Toothless sees Hiccup grieving and goes to Stoicks body.]

Hiccup: No! Get away from him! GO ON! GET OUT OF HERE! GET AWAY!

Valka: It's not his fault. You know that.

[The Alpha takes control of the dragons again. All their pupils shrink into slits as the Alpha takes command of their will.]

Valka: Good dragons under the control of bad people...

[As the Alpha roars, the Viking teens' dragons are controlled as well. They fly away toward the Alpha.]

Snotlout: Wait, don't go!

Valka: ...do bad things.

[Toothless, controlled by the Bewilderbeast, tries to fly. Drago subdues him with his bullhook and forcibly rides him.]

Drago: GATHER THE MEN AND MEET ME AT BERK!

Hiccup: Toothless!

Valka: No, dont!

Drago: Move out!

[Drago and his Bewilderbeast head towards Berk, while his men prepare to sail. All the dragons follow as well.]    

[Stoick's ship drifts out to sea. Snotlout retrieves two arrows. Gobber hands a bow and arrow to Hiccup during his eulogy for Stoick.]

Gobber: May the Valkyries welcome you, and lead you through Odins great battlefield. May they sing your name with love and fury, so that we may hear it rise from the depths of Valhalla... and know that you've taken your rightful place at the table of kings. For a great man has fallen. A warrior. A chieftain. A father. A friend.  

[Hiccup shoots a flaming arrow to light Stoicks ship. The others follow suit.]

Hiccup: I'm sorry, Dad. [All the dragon riders wipe away tears.] Im not the chief that you wanted me to be. And I'm not the peacekeeper I thought I was. I dont know

Valka: You came early into this world. You were such a wee thing. So frail, so fragile. I feared you wouldnt make it. But your father... he never doubted. He always said you'd become the strongest of them all. And he was right. You have the heart of a chief and the soul of a dragon. Only you can bring our worlds together. That is who you are, son.

Hiccup: I was so afraid of becoming my dad. Mostly because I thought I never could. How do you become someone that great? That brave? That selfless? I guess you can only try. (Hiccup's sadness becomes a fierce determination) A chief protects his own. Were going back.

Tuffnut: Uh, with what?

Ruffnut: He took all the dragons.

Hiccup: Not all of them.

[They all are seen riding the baby Scuttleclaws, which were left in the sanctuary as the Alpha cannot control them. But not very well, as they mostly ignore their riders and fly erratically.]

Ruffnut: Fly straight, WILL YA?!

Fishlegs: I don't want to die!

Tuffnut: We cant fly these things!

Fishlegs: Yeah, no kidding! [Crashes through snow pile]

Astrid: But wont that Bewilderbeast just take control of these guys, too?

Hiccup: Theyre babies. They dont listen to anyone!

Tuffnut: Yeah, just like us!

Gobber: This... is... [crashes into wall and recovers] very dangerous! [crashes again and recovers] Some might suggest this is poorly conceived.

Hiccup: Well, its a good thing that I never listen.

Gobber: So, -- what IS your -- plan?

Hiccup: Get Toothless back and kick Dragos--

[Hiccup is interrupted by an iceberg]]

Gobber: Heads up!

Hiccup: And that thing.

[Gobber crashes into the ice again.]


[At Berk]

[The Alpha arrives, taking control of every dragon on Berk. Gothi's Terrible Terrors are mind-controlled and wake her up as they fly away. She looks outside and is startled to see the Bewilderbeast.]

Starkard: Ah, that's a good boy. 

[Starkard's Gronckle gets hypnotized.]

Starkard: Watch the furniture! Where are you going? 

Female Viking: Come back here!

[The combined masses of Berk's dragons, the Sanctuary dragons, and Drago's armored dragons merge into a single massive swarm as the Bewilderbeast climbs onto the island with Drago on his head]

Drago: Your chief is dead.

Viking: Stoick?

Female Viking: Snot possible.

Drago: No one can protect you now.

[The Bewilderbeast freezes Berk.]

[Morning arrives and Hiccup and the riders reach Berk. The hypnotized dragons fly in circles above the Bewilderbeast, who has destroyed much of Berk and encased in in spikes of ice.]

Hiccup: No...

Fishlegs: He took all the dragons!

Hiccup: Distract the Alpha. Try to keep his focus off of Toothless.

Tuffnut: Uh... how? 

Eret: Have your forgotten who youre riding with? There isnt a dragon alive that I cant wrangle! [His Scuttleclaw dives] Except for this one!

Snotlout: Amateur.

Viking: Look, its Hiccup!

Drago: What?

[As Hiccup sneaks toward Toothless on a Scuttleclaw, the Teens and Eret throw sheep in front of the Alpha.]

Ruffnut: Keep 'em coming!

Snotlout: Black Sheep, baby!

[The Alpha is about to fire. Fishlegs blows a horn, and the Black Sheep lands on the Alpha's face. Annoyed, the Alpha blows the sheep away.]

Snotlout: Ten points! Uh-oh...

[Fishlegs blows the horn again and giggles.]

[The Alpha destroys the horn with a blast of ice.]

Fishlegs: Im okay!

[Hiccup is close to the hypnotized Toothless, ridden by Drago. Drago mocks Hiccup as he tries to reunite with his friend.]

Drago: You certainly are hard to get rid of. Ill say that.

Hiccup: Toothless? Its me, bud. Its me. Im right here. Come back to me.

[Toothless still has a blank-eyed look on his face, but already we see his pupils widen for a second and he visibly begins to show signs of resistance]

Drago: He is not yours anymore. He belongs to the Alpha! But, please, oh great Dragon Master, try to take him. He will not miss a second time.

Hiccup: It wasn't your fault, bud. They made you do it. Youd never hurt him. Youd never hurt me!

[Hiccup puts his hand on Toothless's snout. His eyes widen and narrow as he mentally struggles against the Alpha.]

Drago: How are you doing that?

Hiccup: Please. You are my best friend, bud.

[Toothless appears to almost break free, but the Alpha concentrates harder and Toothless's eyes narrow again.]

Hiccup: My best friend.

[Toothless breaks from the Alpha's control. His eyes widen and he smiles at Hiccup, whimpering happily]

Hiccup: Atta boy, that's it! I'm here!

Drago: Enough!

[Drago hits Toothless with his bull hook, but Toothless grabs the hook and yanks him off.]

Hiccup: Yeah!

[Toothless tips over and falls. Hiccup jumps after him.]

Hiccup: Hang on! Almost there buddy. Almost there!

[Hiccup reaches him. He mounts Toothless and the two take to the air.]

Drago: Do something!

Hiccup: We need to get those two apart.

[Hiccup rips fabric from a flag. They dodge the Alpha's ice blast.]

Hiccup: We gotta block him out, Toothless. Do you trust me, bud?

[Toothless replies.]

[Hiccup blindfolds Toothless.]

Hiccup: We can do this. You and me. As one. That's it. Now let's try this one more time!

Astrid: Take him down, babe!

Viking: Go, Hiccup!

Valka: Go get 'em.

Drago: Take control of it!

[The Alpha tries to hypnotize the blindfolded Toothless but fails. Hiccup covers Toothless' "ears".]

Hiccup: Shut it out, Toothless!

Drago: STOP THEM!

Hiccup: NOW!

[Hiccup locks Toothless' tail. Toothless passes him.]

Drago: Ha-ha-ha. (Gasps)

[Toothless is flying upside-down, his blind-fold falling away, and without Hiccup in his saddle.]

[Hiccup, gliding on his flight suit, flies past and surrounds Drago with Zippleback gas and lights it. Drago falls off the Alpha, his bull hook landing just out of reach.]

[Hiccup uncontrollably glides towards the Alpha's tail almost colliding with it.]

Hiccup: Not again. TOOTHLESS! IT'S NOW OR NEVER! Come on, bud!

[Toothless uses his split tail fins to speed up and catch Hiccup before he can hit the Alpha's tail.]

Hiccup: Hold on!

[They narrowly miss crashing into the tail.]

Hiccup: Yeah! We did it!

[Hiccup swoops down on Drago, who is on the ground. He stops Drago from grabbing his bull hook by throwing Inferno.]

Drago: Agghh!

Hiccup: Hold him there Toothless! It's all over now.

[The Alpha rises up behind Hiccup]

Drago: Or is it?

Hiccup: Oh, no!

[The Alpha breathes ice at Hiccup, but Toothless dives in. Both are frozen solid, to Valka and Astrid's horror.]

Valka: No! No...

[Valka tries to break the ice. Then, the ice starts to glow.]

Valka: Hiccup.

[The ice breaks in an explosion and both Toothless and Hiccup are revealed to be alive and well. Toothless is very angry and his back fins are glowing electric blue.]

[Toothless roars a challenge at the Alpha, briefly looking back to Hiccup to reassure him.]

Hiccup: He's challenging the Alpha!

Valka: To protect you.

[Toothless fires at the Alpha, whose tusks smash the icicle Toothless was perching on, but Toothless jumps back and fires again. The Alpha loses concentration and control of the other dragons, with Stormfly being the first dragon to be freed from control. Toothless tells them to come and fight.]

Drago: No, no, no, no! No! Fight back! Fight! FIGHT! What's the matter with you?

[All the dragons, from Berk, the Sanctuary, and even Drago's own armored dragons, fly over to Toothless' side]

Hiccup: Now do you get it? This is what it is to earn a dragons loyalty. Let this end now.

Drago: Never! Come on!

[Toothless directs all the dragons to open fire on Drago's Bewilderbeast. The Alpha is plummeled by a huge bombardment of dragon fire.]

Drago: FIGHT!

[Drago loses his prosthetic arm to an armored dragon's fireball. The Alpha, having been struck hundreds of times, is very angry and roars at Toothless. Toothless fires one more shot right at the Bewilderbeast's face, breaking off one of his tusks. The severed tusk crashes to the ground as the Bewilderbeast roars in pain.]

[Toothless aggressively roars in triumph, and the terrified Bewilderbeast bows in fear of him.]

Hiccup: The Alpha protects them all. 

[The Bewilderbeast leaves, plunging into the sea with Drago still on his back, and the Vikings cheer.]

[The dragons, including Cloudjumper (who appears very proud of his Night Fury friend), bow to Toothless, the new Alpha. Toothless smugly soaks up the attention and roars in victory, and the dragons join in.]

Hiccup: You never cease to amaze me, bud. Thank you.

[Toothless licks him.]

Hiccup: Toothless! You know that doesn't wash out.

[The dragons come back to their riders.]

Hoark: I knew you'd come back.

Viking: Love you, too.

[Gothi's Terrible Terrors cover her.]

Astrid: Stormfly!

Gobber: Oh, give me a cuddle, Grumpy!

Fishlegs: Who's my little princess?

[Ruffnut holds her arms out to Fishlegs and Snotlout, but they run past her.]

Snotlout: Don't you ever leave again, Hookfang!

Fishlegs: Oh, you are. Yes, you are. I missed you so much!

Ruffnut: Oh, Barf!

[Ruffnut hugs Barf.]

Ruffnut:[To Belch] Not you.

Eret: That was some pretty fine dragon wrangling back there. You'd make a good trapper. 

Hiccup: Y'know, Skullcrusher's gonna need somebody to look after him now.

Eret: Me?

[Hiccup nods]

Eret: I'd be honored.

Valka: Your father... hed be every bit as proud as I am.

Hiccup: Thank you. Im really glad youre here, mom.

Valka: And here Ill stay.

Astrid: See? I told you it was in here. [Opens Hiccups gliding suit fin.]

Hiccup: Ha, ha. Still doing that one? Thats hilarious. Come here, you. [Kisses Astrid.]

Gobber: Ooh. [Covers boy's eyes.]

[Gothi taps Hiccup's shoulder and gestures for him to kneel. She uses coal to draw the Chief symbol on Hiccup's forehead.]

Gobber: The Chief has come home!

Vikings: Long live Chief Hiccup! Long live the Chief! Long live the Chief! Long live the Chief! Long live the Chief!
x
[The dragons fire into the sky.]

[A Terrible Terror tries to lift a sheep in a dragon race, but fails. Barf and Belch swoop in and snatch it. Ruffnut and Tuffnut tug-of-war for it. Ruffnut wins, throwing it to Fishlegs, but Snotlout intercepts it and blows a kiss to Ruffnut, before throwing it in the twins' basket. Eret and Skullcrusher join the flight. Hiccup and Toothless are repairing a house.]

Hiccup: (V.O) This... is Berk. A bit trampled and busted and covered in ice, but it's home. It's our home. [The camera shows some Vikings working on a giant statue of Stoick.] Those who attacked us are relentless and crazy. But those who stopped them? Oh, even more so! [Astrid swoops past Hiccup laughing, and Hiccup decides to join them] We may be small in numbers, but we stand for something bigger than anything the world can pit against us. [Valka and Gobber are removing the armor from the dragons that Drago captured.] We are the voice of peace. And bit by bit, we will change this world. [Gobber pauses working to fire the black sheep. Astrid and Stormfly get ready to catch it as in the last race, but Hiccup and Toothless grab it from below her.] You see, we have something they don't. Oh sure, they have armies [Toothless flies under the baskets while Hiccup jumps above them, throwing the black sheep into Astrid's basket.] and they have armadas... But we... we have... [All the riders land at the chief's viewing stand.] OUR DRAGONS! [Toothless roars.]

[The end title card appears.]

(Scene opens at night, on a Dragon Trapper ship. Many dragons are locked in cages, while Ivar, a Dragon Trapper, patrols the area. One dragon roars in frustration, and Ivar taps on the cage.)

Ivar the Witless: Quiet!

(Hiccup comes out of the fog wearing his dragon armor and lights up his Inferno.)

Ivar: What are you?

Hiccup: Shh!

(Toothless climbs down a cage behind Ivar, with the spines on his back glowing blue. The Trapper then attacks Hiccup, who accidentally knocks a lamp, causing the floor to burst into flames. Hiccup and Toothless come out of the fire unharmed, thanks to the fireproof dragon scales.)

Ivar: AAH! YOU'RE A DEMON!

Hiccup: Shhh! Shh, shh, shh! No, no! I'm not a demon! I'm not a demon!

(Hiccup takes off his mask.)

Hiccup: See? Just a guy! Just a guy, here to rescue these dragons, so...

Ivar: But you walked through fire!

Hiccup: Dragon Scales! Dragons shed a lot.

Ivar: Ooh! I know a demon when I see one! No human legs are that skinny!

(Snotlout lands on a light up Hookfang behind the Trapper.)

Snotlout: Think thats a good entrance? Get a load of me! Aah!

(Snotlout's butt catches on fire and the boy runs away.)

Ivar: AAH! I KNEW IT! MORE DEMONS?!

Hiccup: That's really just a nitwit who forgot to fireproof his butt.

Snotlout: Hot! Hot, hot, hot! Guys! No! Not yet!

(Barf and Belch create a little explosion, which knocks down Snotlout, as the twins get off their dragon.)

Tuffnut: Behold, your worst nightmare...

Ruffnut: Behold--

Tuffnut: ...along with his sister who insisted on coming.

Ruffnut: That's my intro?

Hiccup: Guys! Too soon. You always come in too soon!

(Fishlegs lands on his back in front of Hiccup, slipping on the floor.)

Fishlegs: Sorry, still getting the hang of my wings.

Hiccup: Fishlegs, again with the baby? This is a raid.

Fishlegs: I couldn't find a sitter.

(Ivar gets scared of the Dragon Riders in armor and runs away.)

Ivar: DEMONS EVERYWHERE! IT'S THE END OF THE WORLD!

(Astrid jumps from a cage and pushes the Trapper against it, knocking him unconscious.)

Hiccup: Astrid! I had him right where I wanted him.

Astrid: And now he's right where I wanted him. Let's get to work.

Hiccup: Okay, we screwed that up. But, at least nobody else knows we're here.

(However, on the opposite side of the ship, several trappers are running towards the dragon riders.)

(Hiccup then goes to unlock a cage and free a Scuttleclaw.)

Hiccup: Easy, girl. It's okay. Shh! We're gonna get you out of here.

(On another part of the ship, Fishlegs opens a big cage.)

Fishlegs: Ooh! A Crimson Goregutter! Ooooh, hoo, hoo!

(Fishmeat gets excited too, and the Crimson Goregutter looks at the baby, bewildered. Meanwhile, Ruffnut looks at a Hobgobbler in a cage.)

Ruffnut: Ha. Ha. Look at this weirdo. I bet it's super dumb.

(Ruffnut tries to open the cage.)

Ruffnut: Why can't I get this cage open?

Astrid: It slides.

(Astrid opens the cage.)

Ruffnut: Obviously.

(The other Dragon Trapper discovers the Dragon Riders freeing their dragons.)

Dragon Trapper: Attack!

Hiccup: Get the rescued out of here!

Dragon Trapper: Get the Night Fury!

(The Dragon Riders and Trappers begin to fight. One Trapper falls in front of Tuffnut.)

Tuffnut: No running on the deck! It's slippery, You can fall.

Snotlout: Step aside! Let me handle the tough guy stuff!

(Snotlout is about to lose the fight, but Hookfang spits fire at the Trapper, saving his rider.)

Snotlout: Yee-ha! That's two for me!

(Fishlegs fights the Trappers with the help of the rescued Goregutter.)

Fishlegs: Look out!

(Astrid and Hiccup fight together, until they are aided by Toothless.)

Hiccup: Thank you. Now, go get the rest, bud!

Astrid: I thought this was supposed to be a stealth mission.

Hiccup: Yeah, they always start that way.

Astrid: Look out!

(A Trapper prepares to strike Astrid, but Stormfly grabs him and throws him into the ocean.)

Astrid: Thanks, Stormfly!

(Meanwhile, Valka and Cloudjumper watch the scene from above. The Stormcutter shows concern about the mission.)

Valka: Oh, stop worrying. They'll get it.

(The fighting continues and gets worse.)

Snotlout: RAWW!

(Snotlout runs and jumps off of a cage throwing his hammer at the same time but the cape of his dragon armor gets caught on the cage, leaving him hanging.)

Valka: Eventually.

Hiccup: Move out! We got them all!

Tuffnut: I'm gonna headlock every last one of you. I might even leglock you!

Snotlout: Amateurs! I was just getting started.

Astrid: Clear out, guys! Go! Go!

(All the riders except Hiccup gets on their dragons and fly away from the ship. Meanwhile, Toothless is inspecting an empty cage.)

Hiccup: Toothless! Time to go!

(Toothless runs towards his rider, while in the cage, a camouflaged dragon opens its eyes. Hiccup is surrounded by many Trappers.)

Hiccup: Oh! Hey, guys!

(Toothless comes in a hurry, knocks the Trappers, grabs his rider and flies away.)

Hiccup: Ha! Ha! You always have my back, bud!

(The Riders return with the rescued dragons to Berk, which is now a large dragon-Viking utopia.)

Hiccup: This is Berk. Your new home away from home. A stunning, one-styled, all-expense-paid dream destination. So settle in and let your worries melt away! The service here soars, the cuisine's fiery, and the locals are as colorful as you get.

(Hiccup gives a tour of Berk to the new rescued Crimson Goregutter.)

Hiccup: Any run of the mill paradise boasts beaches and sunshine...

(Vikings are seen hopping on dragons to get across to their homes.)

Hiccup: ...Well, not us. We've got something no one else can touch. We, my friend, have dragons. Lots - and lots - of dragons!

(The rescued Crimson Goregutter sits on a pole sticking out of a statue. The pole is turning around the statue. Then, Vikings and dragons quickly run out of the way of the Crimson Goregutter, which finally lands on the Isle of Berk.)

Hiccup: Gang, meet our latest Berkians.

(The Crimson Goregutter roars and two Berkians meet the new rescued dragons.)

Viking man: Welcome to paradise, mate!

Viking woman: Oh, aren't you a beauty?

(Snotlout comes, pushing everyone out of his way.)

Snotlout: Ah, you're welcome, you're welcome. I took on, like, a hundred trappers- a, a thousand trappers!

Ruffnut: All with burning undies.

Tuffnut: My thick, full beard almost caught on fire.

Ruffnut: Ugh. Just, just stop.

Snotlout: So, uh, Hiccup's mom, any notes on my bone-crushing assault, or was it pretty much perfect?

Valka: Oh, it was... indescribable. And please, call me Valka. It has been a year.

(Snotlout nods to himself and smiles.) 

Snotlout: First name basis.

Hiccup: I think the real hero today was Toothless, isn't that right, bud? What would we do without you, oh, King of Dragons? What would we do?

Astrid: Well, we could train a lot harder, for one. That was pretty sloppy.

Valka: Astrid, uh, does have a point. Perhaps you all rely a little bit too much on your dragons and not enough on one another.

Snotlout: See? That's exactly what I was saying. Just, listen up, guys! Yeah, your mom's super impressed with me. I'm like the son she always wanted.

(Fishmeat jumps out of Fishlegs' pocket and goes to play with the Crimson Goregutter.)

Fishlegs: Fishmeat! You found a new friend!

(The Crimson Goregutter starts jumping around, knocking things)

Viking man: Mind your heads!

(Eventually, the Goregutter hits a building, which knocks out others in a row, all collapsing into the ocean.)

Gobber: Ugh! What good is having the King of Dragons around if he can't keep the order?

Hiccup: Hey, bud, do you wanna do something here, or...?

(Toothless roars at the Goregutter, which in turn bows respectfully to his Alpha.)

Gobber: And where do you suppose we put these ones?

Hiccup: Eh, we'll make room.

Gobber: Aah! You brought back a Hobgobbler. They're a bad omen. We're cursed.

(Hiccup laughs.)

Valka: Nonsense. What harm could he do?

(Valka picks up the Hobgobbler and examines him)

Valka: No injuries. They're all a little shaken, but otherwise healthy. Now, who's hungry?

(Scene cuts later in the day, inside the Great Hall, where lots of dragons and Vikings are eating. The dragons are flying all over the place.)

Gobber: Point is, you can't keep bringing dragons back here.

(Gothi, while sitting on her staff being flown by her flock of Terrible Terrors, flies by and lightly shocks Gobber.)

Gobber: Aah!

Snotlout: Come on, boy!

Gobber: You're just asking for trouble.

(Hiccup stops walking and makes Gobber stop as a Berkian chases a Scuttleclaw carrying a fish of his possession, passing Hiccup, and Gobber. They continue walking after they have passed.)

Viking man: No, you don't, you little thief!

Gobber: Those Trappers are getting closer by the day.

(Gobber lifts a Zippleback's tail up so they can walk under it.)

Hiccup: We can handle them. We have the Alpha. Ain't that right, bud? Would you look at how happy they are?

(Valka and Spitelout are having an arm wrestle. Valka wins the arm wrestle, making Spitelout angry and Valka laugh.)

Snotlout: She's awesome.

Hiccup: Gobber, relax. We did it. The world's first dragon-Viking utopia. We made the dream a reality.

Gobber: Your dream, maybe. Mine's less crowded and more...

(The Hobgobbler is floating inside of a cauldron.)

Gobber: Aah! Sanitary.

Hiccup: Gobber, you're not fooling anybody. I know you love them.

(The Hobgobbler is still floating in the cauldron but Toothless scares it, which makes it swim out of the cauldron.)

Gobber: You're supposed to be the generation that leads us into the future.

(Tuffnut is trying to get his plate back from Barf's mouth. But after he takes it back, Tuffnut accidentally makes the food fly over to Snotlout, making Snotlout think Tuffnut wants a food fight.)

Snotlout: Ha-ha! Food fight!

(Snotlout throws the food back at Tuffnut, causing the two of them to have a food fight. Then Ruffnut, who is sitting on the table with a mug of mead, joins in after Tuffnut throws food at her.)

Ruffnut: Mmm, gorg-e-ousss. Watch the hair!

(Fishlegs is holding a little spoon with food in it and moving it closer to Fishmeat.)

Fishlegs: Good Fishmeat.

(Fishmeat then eats the food with the spoon in his mouth. Food hits Gobber in the face.)

Gobber: Ugh! Thor help us. Time to stop worrying about problems out there...

Astrid: Gobber...

Gobber: ...and start sorting out the ones right here.

(Gobber has Hiccup in a headlock on his right and Astrid held in his left arm. Hiccup is having trouble breathing and talking.)

Hiccup: Okay, okay. I-I'll think about it.

Gobber: Hang up those saddles and get married.

(The food fight suddenly stops and everyone looks at Gobber.)

Tuffnut: The "m" word.

Ruffnut: Gross. Unless it's me.

(Ruffnut throws food again.)

Gobber: Start ruling like a proper royal couple. (To Astrid.) Marry him, please. You're the only one with any sense around here. With you wearing the pants, there's still hope.

(Hiccup has been put into a headlock again by Gobber.)

Astrid: Wow! Gobber... Not awkward at all.

(Astrid leaves the table and Gobber follows behind. Hiccup finally gets out of the headlock.)

Gobber: Astrid, don't be like that. (Gobber goes after her.)

Tuffnut: Whoa. That is a definitive no. Look, if you need a beard to cry on--

(Tuffnut pulls Hiccup towards him so Hiccup's face is now in Tuffnut's beard.)

Tuffnut: --just lean on my shoulder and you can cry into my full, thick beard.

Hiccup: Oh, thank you, Tuffnut. Thank you. So much.

(Eret walks towards Hiccup and Tuffnut. Firstly, shocked at what he's seeing but then gets Hiccup's attention by clearing his throat.)

Hiccup: Eret, son of Eret!

(Hiccup forces himself off of Tuffnut's beard so he can speak to Eret.)

Hiccup: What's the report?

Eret, Son of Eret: Two more trapper barges spotted in the strait.

Hiccup: So we go after them.

(Hiccup turns around and looks at Gobber who doesn't look surprised with Hiccup's response.)

Hiccup: What?

Gobber: One day, you're gonna pick a fight you can't win.

(Scene cuts to a bay full of ships and an armored island. Grimmel's airship is flying towards island and lands on it.)

Dragon Trapper: Archers!

(He steps off of his airship and walks to the dragon fighting arena where dragons are controlled using cages and chains. Grimmel and his Deathgrippers walk in amongst the cages and to the Warlords.)

Dragon Trapper: Deathgrippers.

Ivar: The Dragon Riders attacked us here...

(Ivar places a wooden boat on a map.)

Ivar: ...Off the eastern strait.

(Ragnar the Rock starts playing with another wooden boat and makes it "crash" into Ivar's boat.)

Ragnar the Rock: Nnneeaoowww, BOOM.

Chaghatai Khan: Ragnar!

Ragnar: Um, sorry.

Grimmel the Grisly: My dear warlords. How go your plans to go conquer the world?

(Grimmel pulls his hood down.)

Ragnar: Ha-ha-ha! Grimmel, my old friend. Thank you for coming.

(One of Grimmel's Deathgrippers attacks and pins Ragnar down because he is getting too close to Grimmel.)

Ragnar: Oh-ah!

Grimmel: A year since Drago's defeat, and no further along with your dragon army, I see.

Griselda the Grevious: You can thank the young chief of Berk for that.

Grimmel: Stoick's boy?

(Ragnar is still pinned down by the Deathgripper and speaks while the Deathgripper is dribbling on him.)

Ragnar: Yup! He and his peace-loving Dragon Riders continue to raid our ships and steal our dragons.

Grimmel: Mmm. That does sound like a nuisance. But I'm in the business of killing dragons, not retrieving them.

(Grimmel walks away from the Warlords. However, Ragnar jumps up and tries to reason with Grimmel.)

Ragnar: Huh? But, Grimmel...

Grimmel: That idiot boy has done all of the work for you, gathering the dragons in one place. Why bother me?

Chaghatai: Because the flock is protected by a Night Fury.

(Grimmel stops in shock.)

Grimmel: Not possible.

Chaghatai: Hah, well, it seems one slipped through your fingers.

Ragnar: Look, Berk's dragons will follow their Alpha, so we'll pay you to capture him and bring the flock to us. We even have your favorite bait.

(The shot shows a Light Fury locked in a cage.)

Chaghatai: The only dragon they left us from last night's raid.

Grimmel: A female? Hmm.

(The Light Fury looks very frightened with a muzzle on its face.)

Ragnar: So, do we have a deal, old friend?

(A Rumblehorn gets agitated and breaks free from its chains. It charges towards the Warlords who run out of the way.)

Chaghatai: Watch out!

(Grimmel swings around and shoots a projectile from his bow which hits the Rumblehorn. The Rumblehorn collapses and skids on the dirt towards Grimmel.)

Grimmel: When all is said and done, this young chief will bring me the Night Fury.

(Grimmel walks away, after taking his foot out from under the Rumblehorn's head.)

Grimmel: They don't have a leader, just a boy.

(The scene changes to a flashback of Hiccup held by his dad, Stoick, talking on top of a cliff.)

Stoick: Hiccup. This is Berk, son. It's our home. It was the home of your grandparents, and their grandparents before them. And it's my job as chief to protect us, Hiccup. And one day, when you're all grown up, that job will be passed on to you.

Hiccup: Okay.

Stoick: And it's very important, son, because out there, beyond the sunset, lies the home of the dragons.

Hiccup: Wow!

Stoick: Aye! Legends tell of ships that sailed too close to it, only to drop off the edge of the world. Never to be seen again.

(Hiccup gasps.)

Stoick: But those sailors who turned back, told tales of a great waterfall and dragons guarding the entrance to a hidden world.

Hiccup: Whoa.

Stoick: Not just a nest, Hiccup, but a land from which all dragons come.

Hiccup: Even...Night Furies?

Stoick: (Laugh) Especially Night Furies.

Hiccup: Those are scary.

Stoick: Don't you worry. One day, I'll find the Hidden World and seal it up...so that people and dragons will fight no more.

(The scene changes from the flashback's Berk to the current Berk. Hiccup is on the same cliff as the flashback and Toothless pushes Hiccup lightly to get his attention.)

Hiccup: What?

(Toothless looks at Hiccup then looks at his leg and then back at Hiccup again.)

Hiccup: Oh, all right. You do know it's not a chew toy, don't you? Is this what you want? Oh, do you want this leg? Do you want my leg? Go get it.

(Hiccup throws his metal prosthetic leg and Toothless fetches it. Hiccup sits down and works on his map. Then, Hiccup's leg drops from the sky onto his map. Toothless then solo glides above Hiccup.)

Hiccup: Getting pretty good at gliding on your own, bud.

(Toothless lands next to Hiccup and tries to persuade Hiccup to throw his leg again by shoving his leg onto Hiccup's map. Hiccup moves his finger along to the left of the map and taps the empty spot. Astrid and Stormfly appear.)

Astrid: Oh! So this is where you come to get away from Gobber.

(They land next to Hiccup.)

Hiccup: I have no idea what you're talking about.

(Toothless gives Hiccup's sloppy prosthetic leg to Astrid.)

Astrid: Ugh!

(Astrid throws the leg away in disgust. Toothless and Stormfly fetch the leg together. Astrid walks to Hiccup and wipes her hands on Hiccup.)

Astrid: Well, he's right, you know.

Hiccup: R-Really? You think you and I should...

Astrid: Oh, gods, no. We're nowhere near ready for that!

Hiccup: No, that's... that's crazy.

Astrid: I mean he's right about all of this.

(Hiccup sighs and Astrid sits down next to him.)

Hiccup: It does seem like the whole world knows about us now.

Astrid: Yep. And the more dragons we bring back here, the bigger of a target we become.

(Hiccup's prosthetic leg falls on Astrid's lap.)

Astrid: Ugh.

(Astrid throws it away again.)

Astrid: I just wish there was some way to make them leave us alone.

Hiccup: There might be. Dad used to talk about an old mariners' myth. Of a secret land at the edge of the world, where dragons lived totally out of reach.

Astrid: Well, sailors are known for tall tales.

Hiccup: True. But what if it's real? It could be the answer to all of our problems.

Astrid: How? By moving the dragons there?

Hiccup: Uh-uh. All of us.

Astrid: Seriously? And abandon our home of seven generations? The home your father left you to protect.

Hiccup: Uh...

Astrid: Yeah, I think we need a real solution, Hiccup.

(Meanwhile, Toothless is chewing Hiccup's prosthetic leg and not letting Stormfly have a go.)

Hiccup: Well, we could just take Gobber's advice and tie the knot. That should fix everything. But, hey, if you're having doubts about yours truly, I'm pretty sure Snotlout's available.

Astrid: He only has eyes for your mom.

(Hiccup gasps.)

Hiccup: Oh! Playing dirty now, huh?

Astrid: You asked for it. Looks like there might be a wedding after all.

Hiccup: Oh, how dare you! (grabs Astrid and tickles her) That is a low blow. No, no, you are not getting away.

(Astrid then twists Hiccup's arm painfully, who in turn winces in pain.)

Hiccup: Owww! Okay, okay! You win, you win! You always win!

Astrid: You knew what you were getting into.

Hiccup: Uh-huh. Right.

(Toothless runs to the edge of the cliff and then glides down to the forest.)

Hiccup: Uh, bud? Wha-? Yeah, sure, don't bother to wait for us.

(Hiccup sighs.)

(In the forest, Toothless is wandering around searching for something. He uses his smell to sense where it is. He walks further and further into the forest until he spots a female Light Fury laying down in a part of the forest. The dragon turns around and spots Toothless, growling at him. Toothless gets scared but then walks closer to the dragon. They stare at each other until a snap is heard and the dragon shoots a plasma blast at a tree. Hiccup and Astrid arrive at the forest.)

Hiccup: Oh, my gods!

(The dragon growls at Hiccup and Astrid.)

Astrid: Uh, Hiccup!

(The dragon shoots a plasma blast at them, but Astrid manages to push Hiccup out of the way of the blast and they get thrown far but still survive the blast. The dragon is about to shoot another plasma blast but Toothless stops her.)

Hiccup: Yeah. You know, we're friends! No need to kill us.

(However, the Light Fury gets scared and flies away from them. Toothless tries to follow her by climbing the trees. But then the dragon fires a plasma blast and flies through it, turning invisible, also making Toothless sad.)

Hiccup: Wow!

Astrid: Another Night Fury.

Hiccup: No, not quite. It's more like a...Bright...Fury.

Astrid: A Light Fury!

Hiccup: Yeah, yours is better, probably.

(Scene changes back at Berk with all the dragon riders.)

Snotlout: What do you mean, gone?

Hiccup: Vanished! Into thin air.

Fishlegs: What do you think?

(Fishlegs shows Hiccup a drawing of what he thinks the Light Fury looks like.)

Hiccup: Uh-uh. Stubbier ears, no dorsal plates.

(Hiccup hands the drawing back to Fishlegs.)

Fishlegs: Okay, got it.

Eret: Haha. What a night.

(Toothless appears and pushes Hiccup. Lots of saliva is sticking out of his mouth.)

Hiccup: What-what's gotten into you? What is all this...slobbering and panting?

Astrid: Isn't it obvious? He's in love!

Hiccup: Trust me, relationships are nothing but pain and misery.

(He directed it to Toothless, but Astrid hears it and punches Hiccup.)

Astrid: Ugh.

Hiccup: What did I just say? Am-am I not enough?

(Toothless walks away and spots two Deadly Nadders who are performing a mating dance. He gets excited and runs closer.)

Tuffnut: I think that's a no.

(Toothless watches the Deadly Nadders.)

(Fishlegs shows Hiccup another sketch of the Light Fury.)

Fishlegs: Something like this?

Hiccup: You know what? Just trace your Toothless card and make her white.

(Hiccup hands the drawing back to Fishlegs.)

Fishlegs: You could have led with that...

Astrid: Can you believe it? Toothless has a girlfriend!

Hiccup: I never took you for a romantic. Like, ever!

Astrid: But it's so sweet. I mean, look!

(Toothless flirts with his own shadow on a wall in the same way the two Deadly Nadders were. He strokes his face on the wall and pushes his head towards it.)

Tuffnut: Oh, okay. That's just sad...and weird.

Ruffnut: Yeah, you better do something.

Snotlout: Seriously? I'd rather shovel poop all day than watch that.

Hiccup: Alright. Let's head back to the woods and see if we can find her.

(As Toothless hears that, he quickly looks at Hiccup and shows his excitement by running around.)

Tuffnut: Ah. Good idea!

(Tuffnut walks with Hiccup with his arm over Hiccup's shoulder.)

Tuffnut: A little privacy.

Hiccup: Uhhh...

Tuffnut: Shh. It's boy talk!

Hiccup: What?

(They walk off to the forest together with Toothless. Astrid shrugs her shoulders.)

Tuffnut: Come on. Let's go work this out.

(Scene cuts to Hiccup, Tuffnut and Toothless in the forest.)

Tuffnut: So. Wanna get married?

Hiccup: Uhh... No, actually.

Tuffnut: Good news. I've been to two weddings. I crashed both. But none as high profile as this one. Lots of pressure. Judgment. Not just by me.

Hiccup: Look. We talked about it. We're not getting married.

(Tuffnut stops walking and makes Hiccup stop too.)

Tuffnut: Cold feet! I've seen it before. Don't worry, little Hiccy. I'm here.

(Tuffnut walks off.)

Hiccup: Wait, Hiccy?

(Hiccup nods his head sideways and walks with Tuffnut again.)

Tuffnut: Now, I've seen the way Astrid looks at you. Everyone has that doubt. That not-so-subtle disappointment. That longing for something more than you. You need to focus on being worthy. I mean, she's a warrior queen for Thor's sake! And you are...neither. But with me as your best man, your spirit guide if you will, you'll learn to embrace your inner Viking. Show these naysayers, of which there are many, that you are more than just a malnourished runt with bad hair, strange teeth and a twig for a neck.

Hiccup: You're-you're really bad at pep talks.

Tuffnut: Stop letting these insecurities get the best of you.

(They stop walking as they arrive at the same place as where Toothless found the Light Fury. Toothless is seen to be walking around something.)

Tuffnut: Everyone's watching. I mean everyone. You need to man up. Do as I do. It will be hard, but...you have my word.

(Hiccup sees something metallic on the ground.)

Tuffnut: And until I break that word, I won't give up!

(Hiccup runs towards the metallic thing.)

Tuffnut: Hey! Hey! What, am I wasting my time here?

(Hiccup then picks the metallic thing up. It looks like a projectile dart.)

Tuffnut: You see some shiny thing in the woods- Oh, what is that?

(Toothless is still searching for the Light Fury. However, he finds nothing and becomes sad. He starts walking back towards Hiccup.)

Hiccup: Toothless!

(Toothless jumps back, frightened.)

Hiccup: Don't move a muscle.

(Hiccup takes Tuffnut's stick which Tuffnut has been carrying for the whole walk.)

Tuffnut: Hey!

(Hiccup throws the stick at a spot in the clearing, causing a dangerous trap to be triggered and Hiccup to fall backwards onto the ground. Toothless gets angry and Hiccup gets shocked.)

(The scene changes at the Blacksmith Shop with all the dragon riders. Hiccup places the dart onto a barrel.)

Hiccup: Someone's here.

Gobber: Huh?

(Tuffnut takes the dart.)

Hiccup: He managed to slip past our scouts and lay a trap in the woods.

Tuffnut: It ruined boy talk!

(Tuffnut throws the dart and it manages to hit a wooden box which Eret is carrying.)

Eret: Ohohh!

Gobber: Let me at 'em!

Hiccup: Slow down, Gobber. Let's get a search team on the ground. Scouts in the air. Toothless and I will fly the coastline.

(Eret is inspecting the dart for himself.)

Eret: Yeah. I wouldn't advise taking Toothless anywhere, Chief. I know this handy work. Grimmel the Grisly. Famous back where I'm from. The smartest dragon hunter I ever met. Well, next to me of course.

Hiccup: Well, he can't be that smart. He left his trap unmanned.

(Eret hands the dart to Astrid and she inspects it too.)

Eret: Haha. Nothing's accidental when it comes to old Grimmel. He lives for the hunt, to get inside the mind of his prey, to control its every choice. It's all a game to him.

Astrid: Well, he doesn't know who he's playing with.

Hiccup: Yeah. We've dealt with his kind before.

Eret: Don't underestimate him, Hiccup. Mark my words, he'll be back.

Hiccup: Then we'll be waiting for him.

(Scene cuts, inside the Haddock house at night with Hiccup alone.)

(Hiccup is searching for clues about the Hidden World in his Dad's journal and his map.)

Hiccup: Alright. Alright, come on give me a clue here. Give me a clue, Dad.

(While Hiccup looks through the notes, footsteps are heard from above the house and dust falls from the ceiling. Hiccup packs his map and the book away. He looks around his house and suddenly a floorboard creak is heard followed by a silhouette of Grimmel. Grimmel pours tea into a mug.)

Grimmel: Oh, I hope you don't mind if I help myself. This is, uh... quite good.

(Hiccup lights up Inferno.)

Grimmel: That is impressive. But let me finish my drink.

(Grimmel shoots a dart from his bow which hits the sleeping Toothless under bed covers.)

Hiccup: Toothless!

(Hiccup runs towards Toothless. Grimmel finishes his drink and looks proud of himself. He then loads another dart into his bow.)

Hiccup: What did you do to him?

Grimmel: Eh, nothing that he won't sleep off. (Sits on Stoick's chair) Ahh. Haha. May I? Chief Hiccup, hmm? Do I say Chief Hic-cup (makes hiccuping sound) or do I just call you Hiccup? What do you prefer?

(Hiccup slowly walks closer, with a stern look on his face.)

Grimmel: You have no idea who I am, do you? Uh- ha ha. Well, your father knew of me. Now, there was a chief. One of the greatest dragon hunters to have ever lived! What would he think of you? Huh-hah.

(Grimmel laughs)

Grimmel: He had it right, you know. Making it his mission to destroy the beasts so that you could grow up in a better world.

Hiccup: He changed his mind.

Grimmel: And look where that got him.

(Hiccup looks upset after that comment.)

Grimmel: So, let's get to the point. I am the Night Fury killer. I've hunted every last one but yours. You are going to give me that dragon. Or I will-

Hiccup: I will never give him up.

(Grimmel stands up and pushes Hiccup's Inferno out of his way, laughing. He starts walking towards Toothless.)

Grimmel: You wish dragons to live free among us, like equals? A toxic notion, my boy. History has shown that we are the superior species. What if word of your misguided ideas were to spread? It would be the undoing of civilization as we... know it. Hmm.

(Grimmel notices straw sticking out of Toothless' tail, so he kicks it slightly. This causes Fishlegs to wake up as he was hiding under the covers wearing a Toothless disguise.)

Fishlegs: Did we get him?

(Fishlegs faints and falls back to sleep. Hiccup uses his Inferno to throw Grimmel's bow away.)

Hiccup: Now!

(The Dragon Riders reveal themselves from their covers.)

Gobber: Sorry to barge in!

Hiccup: You think you can come into my home, sit in my father's chair, and threaten my dragon?! This is Berk, and we have defended our way of life from far worse than you!

Grimmel: Oh. Haha. A fighting spirit, I love it! Only, I'm afraid you're mistaken. You've never seen anything like me!

(Grimmel whistles, calling his Deathgrippers to attack the riders. One of Grimmel's Deathgrippers attacks from the roof, which causes Astrid, who was hiding on a wooden beam, to jump down to the floor of the house.)

Astrid: Ah!

Hiccup: Astrid, look out!

(The Deathgripper gets ready to strike with its tail but misses Astrid who is sitting on the floor. Astrid runs to the others. Grimmel whistles again, making another Deathgripper attack the riders.)

Valka: Look out! Son, get clear!

(Astrid runs, just missing the Deathgripper's acid.)

Astrid: Ugh!

Gobber: Run!

(Gobber runs out of the house, carrying Fishlegs)

Valka: Ah!

(Valka and Hiccup are still in the house. Valka uses her shield to block the Deathgripper's acid)

Grimmel: Have my dragon ready when I return, or I will destroy everything you love!

(Valka and Hiccup escape Hiccup's burning house but then see a view of all of Berk in flames.)

Viking 1: Inside!

Viking 2: It's the middle of the night!

Viking 3: What are we doing here?!

(Scene cuts to all of the Berkians inside the great hall at night, just after the attack.)

Hiccup: Alright! Alright, everybody! Settle down, please!

(Everyone keeps shouting and talking)

Hiccup: Fishlegs, have you ever seen that species of dragon before?

(Fishlegs, still dizzy after being shot by Grimmel's dart, nods in agreement but then faints and falls off his chair.)

Spitelout: Let me at 'em!

Viking: I'll give him a piece of my mind. And by mind, I mean fist!

(The Viking punches another Viking in the face.)

Hiccup: Did you miss the part where we almost died? Have you seen my house? This is a new kind of enemy and I underestimated him. Now, that's on me. But I will not do that again.

Snotlout: We're Vikings! We don't run from a fight. At least I don't.

(Snotlout points at Eret.)

Snotlout: You might.

Eret: I agree with Hiccup. We haven't seen the last of Grimmel. He's a predator, single-minded and patient. He won't stop until he gets what he wants.

Valka: I'm with Eret.

(Snotlout looks at Valka amazed and then angrily at Eret.)

Valka: We have to take this threat seriously.

Hiccup: Grimmel is just a sign of the times. Our enemies are getting smarter, more determined. We're not just overcrowded. We are exposed, and vulnerable. Short of full-blown war and risking everyone we love, I don't... I don't see a way of staying here any longer.

(Everyone starts talking. However, Astrid throws her axe on the table to get everyone's attention.)

Astrid: Hey! Hear him out!

(Astrid sits back down and nods at Hiccup.)

Hiccup: If we want to live in peace with our dragons, we need a better plan.

Gobber: So, what are you saying, Chief?

Hiccup: I'm saying we have to disappear. Off the map. Take the dragons to a place where no one will find them.

Male Viking: And where might that be?

Astrid: He's talking about a quest for the Hidden World.

Female Viking: The hidden what?

Ruffnut: Out to lunch.

Tuffnut: (laughs) Yeah.

Hiccup: My father was obsessed with it when I was a boy. He made notes and maps in search of the ancestral home of all dragons, tucked away somewhere beyond the edge of the world. It may be the solution we need. We're dragon people. It's where we belong.

(The Berkians don't sound like they can believe what Hiccup is saying.)

Hiccup: Look, I know this is our home. My father left me to protect it.

(Some of the Berkians look like they are starting to believe.)

Hiccup: But Berk is more than this place. We are Berk! The people! The dragons! I say Berk is wherever we go.

(The twins are sitting on a bench and look bored until Tuffnut jumps up.)

Tuffnut: I'm with him! Who else?!

(Scene changes in the sky with all the Berkians and their dragons on the adventure to The Hidden World.)

(On a ship, being carried by a dragon, a sheep is wearing a dragon outfit. It bleats proudly until he spots a dragon which makes it duck back in the ship.)

Fishlegs: Excuse me. Coming through. Just skipping through here. Fishmeat, eat your rocks. Eat your rocks.

(Fishlegs flies through with Fishmeat crying and excited.)

(Fishlegs gives Fishmeat a rock to eat. Fishmeat eats it vigorously)

Snotlout: Gah! People who fly with babies are the worst!

(Snotlout ducks as Fishmeat's lava blast hits Snotlout's seat.)

Gobber: I feel like I'm always asking you this question but- woah!

(Gobber suddenly loses control of his dragon, Grump.)

Gobber: Wake up, Grump! Wake up!

(Hiccup uses his spyglass to look at the horizon.)

Gobber: Is there an actual plan or--

Hiccup: Just keep flying until we reach the end of the world.

Gobber: Ah, seems sensible.

(The scene changes at Berk. All of the dragon trappers, warlords and Grimmel are on the empty island.)

Chaghatai: So? Where are they?!

Grimmel: Gone. Obviously.

Griselda: The Night Fury escaped you? Again!

Grimmel: I encouraged it. They've abandoned their only defensible position.

(Scene changes back with the Berkians.)

Grimmel: Running scared with what little they can carry.

Snotlout: Ugh. It just keeps going.

Tuffnut: That's because the world is actually round.

(Hiccup rolls his eyes, shakes his head and then keeps looking through his spyglass.)

Tuffnut: The Sun is round. Moon is round.

(Astrid chuckles, shakes her head and looks at Valka.)

(Toothless senses something.)

Tuffnut: Stars are round. Even though they're small and stupid.

(Ruffnut laughs.)

Tuffnut: Right? Stars.

(Scene changes back at Berk again.)

Grimmel: Don't fret. They won't get far. The Night Fury is distracted. I introduced him to your female.

(Scene changes back with the Berkians again. Toothless is sensing something again.)

Grimmel: Furies mate for life, you see.

Hiccup: What're you picking up on, bud?

(The Light Fury is seen to have been following the Berkians.)

Astrid: (gasps) The Light Fury!

Valka: She's following us!

Viking: Cool!

(The Light Fury shoots a plasma blast and turns invisible.)

Gobber: Would you look at that!

Tuffnut: Where did she go? Is she made of sky?

(Toothless flies to where the Light Fury turned invisible.)

Hiccup: Woah! Hold up, Toothless!

(Toothless, very excited, looks in all directions searching for the Light Fury. Hiccup looks behind and spots the Light Fury.)

Hiccup: Well, look who it is!

(However, the Light Fury looks angry and as if she is going to grab him.)

Hiccup: Uh...

(The Light Fury grabs Hiccup)

Hiccup: Aah! Hey. It's really nice to finally-

(The Light Fury throws Hiccup away and he falls down in the sky.)

Hiccup: Waaaaaah!

(The Light Fury looks at Toothless like she has done something really good. Toothless looks awkward and flies down to save his rider. The Light Fury looks stunned. Toothless saves Hiccup and flies back with the others.)

Hiccup: Not a word.

(Toothless looks at the sky, trying to see if the Light Fury is there again but she isn't, which makes him sad.)

(Scene changes back on Berk.)

Ragnar: Yeah yeah yeah. Yes. But where did they go?

Grimmel: (sighs) Do I have to explain this? Night Furies can't survive in the cold so they haven't gone north.

(Grimmel crosses off the north of the map.)

Grimmel: They're trying to put distance between themselves and enemies to the east and south...

(Grimmel crosses off the east and south on the map.)

Grimmel: ...And Night Furies cannot fly long distances without rest.

(While Grimmel was saying this, Hiccup discovers there is an island ahead of them on their search.)

Grimmel: Their flight path must include stops.

Fishlegs: Potty break!

(They fly to the island for a break.)

Grimmel: Therefore, they've gone... They can only have gone... Does anyone want to take a guess?

(Scene is back on Berk.)

Grimmel: Anyone? W-w-w-w-w?

Ragnar: Ah! East!

(Ragnar places a wooden boat on to east of the map)

Grimmel: West! Hmm? Simple, you see? Oh-ho, isn't this fun? Yes? No.

Griselda: Ugh.

(Griselda pushes Ragnar out of the way and walks off.)

Grimmel: Yes. Yes.

(Chaghatai also walks off in disappointment.)

Grimmel: Where's your love of the hunt? I thought you were conquerors! You'll have your prize, in time! Just allow me a few more days to enjoy this. I have dearly missed it.

(Scene cuts at the new island with the Dragon Riders.)

Hiccup: Alright! Looks like we're camping here for tonight.

Gobber: Well, thank Thor for that!

Tuffnut: Yes! My own place! I plan to build a hut. Only for the bearded! Ruffnut, you gotta stay out! Chin whiskers don't count!

(Snotlout is using his hands as a frame for his house.)

Snotlout: I see a tower of manliness in the shape of me. It's gonna be taller than Eret with bigger muscles.

(Eret ends up being in Snotlout's frame.)

Eret: Wha-what?

Snotlout: Get out of my house!

(Snotlout charges towards Eret.)

Eret: Hey! Is there a problem here?

Snotlout: Yeah, there's a problem...

(Snotlout steps onto a wooden box)

Snotlout: ...Ever since you showed up, you've been trying to upstage me. You're just so...

(Snotlout climbs up onto a barrel.)

Snotlout: Jealous! Delusional!

Eret: Ah, delusion's a good word for it.

Snotlout: Listen, Son of Eret! When Hiccup blows it as chief, I'm next in line. Number two...

(Snotlout puts up three of his fingers up.)

Snotlout: ...'cause I'm clearly Valka's favorite.

(Eret walks away, confused at what Snotlout is saying.)

Snotlout: So--better start--showing me respect!

(Snotlout points at Eret and wobbles on the barrel.)

Eret: Strange little man.

Gobber: Ah, don't mind him. It's not your fault you have the body of a Norse God. I, myself, have the same problem.

(Gobber stretches his back, but his back painfully cracks.)

Gobber: Aaah!

(Gobber picks up a tool and places it into the ground.)

Gobber: Blacksmith stall goes right here.

(Gobber discovers that several Hobgobblers have followed them.)

Gobber: Gaaah! One, two, three, four, five... where's...?!

(After Gobber has counted them, he walks back, scared, away from them.)

Hiccup: Oh, okay. Hold on, gang. I-I said make camp...

(Gobber walks toward the crowd, frantic. He accidentally bumps into Spitelout.)

Gobber: Do you see them?

Hiccup: ...not, build a new village.

Snotlout: Who died and made you chief?

(The crowd of Berkians are stunned by what Snotlout says.)

Snotlout: What?

(Gothi flies past Snotlout and smacks him with her staff.)

Snotlout: Oww!

Hiccup: Granted this place is very nice, but it's not the Hidden World.

Male Viking #1: We don't even know if this "hidden world" exists!

Male Viking #2: Yeah. This place is real!

(The Viking points at the ground. Valka approaches Hiccup to help him out.)

Valka: There's nothing more stubborn than a mob of tired, hungry Vikings.

Hiccup: (sighs) Well, I guess this could work as a base in the meantime. It's defensible. Hidden. Alright! You can stay!

Gobber: Say hello to New Berk!

(The crowd cheers.)

Gobber: Let's get building, lads!

Hiccup: Until Toothless and I find the Hidden World.

(The crowd feels discouraged and walks off to start building.)

Tuffnut: Now, about that voice. Can we lose the whole honking goose... thing? It's hard to imagine wedded bliss with that going off every minute. (chuckles)

Valka: If you're going to continue west, I should head back to make sure we weren't followed.

Snotlout: Great idea. I'll go with you. For protection.

Valka: No! You're far too important here.

Snotlout: Yeah...

Hiccup: Just, be careful.

(Valka looks like she is going to speak but then looks at Hiccup.)

Hiccup: What?

Valka: This plan... to hide us from the rest of the world, though--though I wish it were possible, I fear it can't last, Hiccup. And you know I tried to do the same for years. But greedy humans always find a way. I just... I only ask that you think about it.

(Valka pats Hiccup's left shoulder and walks off.)

Hiccup: Do you still think I'm crazy or...

Astrid: Let's just say, this whole idea is very...you.

Hiccup: Well, thanks for supporting me last night. It meant a lot.

(Astrid walks towards Hiccup with a book.)

Astrid: Don't thank me yet. I just hope you're right about this.

(Astrid hands Hiccup the book, which is actually the book with his father's notes inside.)

(Scene cuts at night in Hiccup's hut on New Berk.)

(Hiccup is sleeping with the book on his face. Toothless wakes up sensing something is close, causing Hiccup to fall and wake up.)

Hiccup: Toothless, no, it's too early.

(Toothless leaves Hiccup's hut and notices leaves moving, causing the curious Toothless to check them. He smells them and happily discovers that the Light Fury is very close. The Light Fury then appears, which makes Toothless really excited. The Light Fury growls and disappears again. Toothless follows her and they stare at each other before he bangs his head into something. Toothless loses sight of her but then spots her on the opposite side of a hut. The Light Fury runs off and so does Toothless. Hiccup leaves his hut, yawning.)

(The Light Fury flies very quickly while Toothless catches up, running. However, Toothless stops running just before a hill. The Light Fury lands beyond the hill watching Toothless perched on the hill. Toothless takes one step off the hill and falls down it crazily. Hiccup arrives but watches from where Toothless was perched on the hill. The Light Fury flirts at Toothless. Toothless discovers Hiccup is on the hill and watches him make flying gestures. Toothless flaps his wings, but the Light Fury only responds by licking herself. Toothless watches Hiccup do another dance but steps on a stick, causing it to snap and the Light Fury to look at the hill. She doesn't see Hiccup but feels suspicious. Toothless starts flapping his wings very quickly, but goes out of control and then causes the Light Fury to block herself from the sand. She then sneezes and Toothless gets frustrated at himself. He looks at Hiccup who is putting his thumb up and does a chicken dance. Toothless performs what Hiccup showed him but the Light Fury just watches. Then Toothless performs various strange dances, causing the Light Fury to get agitated and Hiccup to facepalm. When Toothless gets too close to the Light Fury, she hits him in the face. She then flies to a branch, hangs down from it and covers her face with her wings. Hiccup looks worried as Toothless walks to the start of the branch. Toothless points towards the end of the branch with his wing and then walks to the end of the branch. Toothless looks at Hiccup showing him a hand gesture suggesting the branch will snap. However, Toothless bounces up and down on the branch, causing the Light Fury to get more agitated. Toothless finally snaps the branch and falls off of it. The Light Fury, still hanging from the branch, covers her face with her wings again.)

(Hiccup waves his arms, trying to get Toothless' attention. Toothless looks at Hiccup and feels disappointed, but then spots part of the branch and starts drawing something with it in his mouth. This causes the Light Fury to feel curious, so she drops onto the ground and starts watching him draw. Toothless finishes drawing the Light Fury's face.)

Hiccup: Oh, now you can draw!

(The Light Fury steps onto Toothless' drawing and makes Toothless angry. The Light Fury growls, but then Toothless drops the branch from his mouth in awe and the Light Fury looks surprised. The Light Fury walks around the drawing to Toothless, and they stare at each other. Hiccup looks happy. Then the Light Fury walks away and takes off, inviting Toothless to follow her. She flies around Toothless while he runs across the rocks, unable to fly on his own. The Light Fury hovers and notices Hiccup is on the hill, which makes her angry and flies off. Toothless tries to fly off with her but he just falls into the lake. Toothless looks at his tail and splashes it into the water angrily. Hiccup looks upset and thoughtful.)

(Scene cuts in the morning on New Berk with Hiccup, Astrid and Toothless.)

(Hiccup is seen to be working on a prosthetic tail fin. Astrid looks at what Hiccup is doing and then looks at a diagram of a tail fin on a board.)

Astrid: Oh. Someone hasn't slept.

Hiccup Yeah. Well, that Light Fury won't let me within a mile of her.

(As Hiccup says this, Toothless scratches himself, causing his scales to shed and fall onto the ground. Astrid picks them up and walks to Hiccup.)

Hiccup: And neither of us will be getting any sleep or finding the Hidden World until Toothless takes over.

(Toothless pushes Hiccup out of the way to look through a magnifying glass.)

Hiccup: Hey! What do you think of that? Yeah.

(Hiccup pushes Toothless away and picks up a bowl.)

Astrid: You tried this once before. He didn't want it.

(Astrid drops Toothless' black scales into the bowl.)

Hiccup: Well, until now he didn't have a reason to. Right, bud?

(Toothless spits into the bowl and Hiccup mashes the scales.)

Astrid: Hm...

Hiccup: What?

Astrid: No. Nothing. I'm--I'm impressed. I mean, look at you. Embracing change. I am proud of you.

(Hiccup starts painting the prosthetic tail fin with the now black liquid from the bowl.)

Hiccup: Well, he's my best bud. I want him to be happy. And besides it's just until he brings her back.

(Hiccup kisses Astrid's head and picks up the new prosthetic tail fin. However, Astrid looks worried by what Hiccup said and shakes her head.)

Hiccup: Alright, fire when ready!

Gobber: Oh!

(Gobber is behind the tail fin as Toothless shoots a plasma blast at it, making Gobber's clothes singed and setting his mustache on fire.)

Gobber: Well, I guess you know the tail is fireproof.

(Gobber puts out the flame on his mustache, looks at Hiccup angrily and then walks off. Hiccup looks at Gobber sheepishly.)

Hiccup: Okay, Toothless.

(Toothless runs around crazily, excited for Hiccup to put the tail on.)

Hiccup: Okay. Okay. Okay. Yes, I know. Shh, I know. Shhh.

(Toothless stops running around and allows Hiccup to attach the new tail.)

Hiccup: Okay, I know.

(Hiccup tries to attach the new tail, but Toothless moves his tail too much.)

Hiccup: Please, this is not helping.

Eret: Well, well, well. Someone's excited.

Hiccup: Uh, he's fresh off his first date. Now he's love-crazed.

(Hiccup manages to attach the tail but still tries to adjust some stuff.)

Gobber: Only we're the ones going crazy. The sooner he brings back that Light Fury, the better.

Hiccup: Yeah, but to do that, he'll need to fly without me. So, time to give this new and improved baby a shot.

(Hiccup finishes and Toothless tries expanding the tail, making him happy.)

Hiccup: Attaboy! Looking sharp, Toothless. So, what do you think, bud? Bring her home (impersonates Stoick) by sundown at the latest.

(Toothless pushes his head into Hiccup, licks his face, and then gives him a hug.)

Hiccup: No, save it for your girlfriend! Go on, get out of here!

(Hiccup urges Toothless to leave with a light push. Toothless starts running off but stops as he doesn't think it's right. He turns around and looks at Hiccup.)

Hiccup: It's okay.

(Toothless replies excited and then flies off. As he is flying he looks at his new tail fin and then looks at Hiccup who is smiling. Everyone around Hiccup stops working and looks at him in shock. Hiccup takes a heavy sigh and then everyone starts working again.)

(Scene changes in the sky with Valka and Cloudjumper. It is foggy.)

(Valka discovers they have been followed by Grimmel, the Warlords and their Dragon Trappers. Valka spots Grimmel's Airship and then one of Grimmel's Deathgrippers attacks Valka, followed by another one.)

Valka: Watch out!

(Cloudjumper grabs the incoming Deathgripper and throws it at the other Deathgripper.)

Valka: Go, Cloudjumper!

(Grimmel stops his Deathgrippers from attacking Valka by whistling. They stop and Valka and Cloudjumper escape just in time.)

(Scene cuts in the sky with Toothless searching for the Light Fury.)

(As Toothless searches, he thinks he can see the Light Fury but instead, it is just his own shadow on a cloud. He hears a sound and flies towards it until he finally finds the Light Fury, making him very happy and stare at her for a while. Toothless shows the Light Fury his new tail by closing and expanding it. This makes the Light Fury happy. They fly into a vortex and the Light Fury shoots a plasma blast, flies through it which makes her invisible. She then invites Toothless to do the same. Toothless tries two times but fails. Toothless feels sad and looks at the Light Fury who encourages him. Determined, he closes his eyes and extends his glowing blue back spines Suddenly, electricity and lightning appear out of Toothless' body. He roars, attract lightning from the thunderstorm and turns invisible. When he turns visible again, he feels tired and falls down in the sky. The Light Fury catches him and then Toothless flies on his own again. Next, they fly with each other, romantically. They fly up together in the shape of a love heart. Toothless licks the Light Fury's face and then they fly back down again. The Northern lights are seen and they touch each other's wings. Toothless looks very happy for himself. They arrive at a huge waterfall and then the Light Fury pulls Toothless down into the hole of the waterfall.)

(Scene cuts at night with all the Berkians having a party on New Berk.)

Vikings: For the Chief.

Vikings: To the Chief.

(A group of Berkians put their mugs up in the air and then drink from their mugs. Some Berkians are throwing Hiccup up in the air in celebration.)

Hiccup: Yeah, okay, guys! Now I'm just getting sick! Okay. Ha. Ha. Ha.

(Hiccup looks like he is going to be sick on Gobber.)

Gobber: Don't say I thought you were a little off your raw for this but it isn't half bad.

Hiccup: This is supposed to be a temporary solution.

Eret: It's unanimous.

(Eret picks up a chicken drumstick.)

Eret: Everyone agrees we've definitely traded up.

(Eret barges Hiccup with his arm.)

Eret: Well done, Chief. 

(Hiccup fake laughs while Eret leaves and eats the chicken drumstick.)

Hiccup: What if the tail broke? What if Grimmel found him? What if... he needs me?

Gobber: Would you relax? He's probably having the time of his life.

Hiccup: How would I know? She never comes around. And when she does, she's always rushing off. I'm saying how-how do we know if she's right for us.

Gobber: Us?

Hiccup: You know what I mean. She's so wild and skittish. I'm just gonna say it, I don't trust her.

(Gobber laughs.)

Gobber: Can't tame them all, Hiccup. One day, you'll have to snip those apron strings and let Toothless stretch his wings. Reminds me of a talk I had with Stoick about you. Gaaah!

(The Hobgobblers appear out of nowhere again and there seems to be more and more each time.)

Gobber: Where do they keep coming from?!

(Gobber hides behind a hut.)

Hiccup: Who?

(Gobber points at the Hobgobblers.)

Gobber: Those bloody Hobgobblers.

(Hiccup looks towards where Gobber points but the Hobgobblers have disappeared.)

Gobber: I swear, they're popping up faster than rabbits.

(Gobber comes out of his hiding place and whispers at Hiccup.)

Gobber: I think they want to eat me. Evidence would suggest that I'm tasty.

Tuffnut: Hiccy! A moment? Listen, I've been watching you walk. Lose the limp. No one's gonna marry that. (chuckles)

Hiccup: I have a prosthetic leg!

Gobber: So have I!

Tuffnut: And I have parasitic twin, but you don't see me limping around about it! Come on.

(Tuffnut tries to make Hiccup keep his chin up.)

Tuffnut: Chin up, Hiccy!

(Tuffnut pats Hiccup's chest but Hiccup doesn't approve of it so he pushes Tuffnut's hand away.)

Tuffnut: Pop out that chest!

(Hiccup walks away and then Tuffnut slaps Hiccup's butt.)

Tuffnut: Move that butt to the left a little bit!

(Gobber, who was staying out of it and stayed back, hears a noise and then turns around. He discovers that even more Hobgobblers have appeared.)

Gobber: Wooooo!

(Gobber runs away as fast as he can.)

(Valka and Cloudjumper arrive back at New Berk.)

Hiccup: Mom! Are you hurt? What happened out there?

Valka: I don't know how, but Grimmel is tracking us.

Gobber: Gaaah! This is all because of the Hobgobblers!

Valka: He has a hundred ships, maybe more. With enough cages for all our dragons.

(Hiccup sighs and thinks of something to do.)

Hiccup: If Grimmel is leading them here, we have to take him out of the mix.

Tuffnut: Uh... and how would we do that?

Hiccup: By going there to capture him.

Gobber: Capture him?

(Tuffnut jumps with his arms up in the air.)

Tuffnut: I'm with him! Who else?!

(Scene cuts at night in Grimmel's temporary base with his Deathgrippers.)

(One of his Deathgrippers has put its stinger into the top of a glass and is releasing its own venom into it. The Deathgripper takes its stinger out of the glass. Grimmel pours the venom from the glass into a tube and then places the tube into one of his darts. The riders, which are wearing their dragon flight suits, are flying to Grimmel's temporary base. Hiccup, who has been riding on Stormfly, jumps off, flies to the base and lands on it. Grimmel is still working on something before his Deathgrippers sense that the riders are close. He clicks his fingers, making his Deathgrippers defend him and his base. The riders appear from behind rocks.)

Snotlout: Okay. Split up, we'll be harder to catch.

Eret: I was thinking we should split up... just because.

Valka: I like your instincts.

(The Riders walk-off individually and split up.)

Snotlout: What is this?!

(The Riders walk stealthily inside of Grimmel's tower. Astrid throws a stone to the opposite side of the building, misleading a Deathgripper. Tuffnut is very visible until Ruffnut pulls him down barely before a Deathgripper spots him. Hiccup runs upstairs and arrives in Grimmel's room with his Inferno lit. Hiccup doesn't see him inside Grimmel's room anywhere. Unexpectedly, a net falls down and covers the base. Hiccup runs out of the room and Fishmeat starts screaming.)

Fishlegs: Shh. Shh. Quiet!

(Hiccup is out of Grimmel's room and finds Grimmel on the other side of the net.)

Grimmel: Where's your dragon when you need him? Hmm, Chief? Must have forgotten all about you. (laughs) First rule of the hunt: Separate the prey from its pack. You've just removed yourselves from the equation.

Hiccup: Why are you doing this?

Grimmel: Really? I didn't think you cared. Well, unlike you, when I was a boy and I came up on a Night Fury, I killed it where it slept! That simple act of courage made me a hero in my village. So, I decided to kill every last one, bringing real peace to the people of this world. Until you came along preaching that dragons are something other than thieves and murderers. Psssh. That nonsense dies now. Starting with you.

Hiccup: But you have dragons of your own.

(Grimmel laughs at Hiccup's comment.)

Grimmel: These? They're dragon killers, drugged into obedience with their own venom. Not even your precious Alpha could control them. They serve me...

(Grimmel pushes a drug into the Deathgripper next to him.)

Grimmel: ...and only me. Allow me to demonstrate.

(Grimmel whistles.)

Hiccup: Take cover!

(A Deathgripper shoots its acid at the stairs which Hiccup is standing on but Hiccup goes up to them just in time.)

Astrid: Split up!

(They split up, running. Astrid gets targeted by a Deathgripper and tries to climb up the net. She just manages to get on top of a section of the net before the Deathgripper jumps on top too. Hiccup jumps and flies onto the chains from the now destroyed stairs. He tries to climb up them but has to swing to a wall before he gets killed from falling. The Deathgripper shoots its acid burst at Hiccup but he just manages to dodge it and get on top. Valka is being attacked by the Deathgrippers and dodges their acid bursts by using her staff. She is right at the top of the building and swings her staff around to call for help.)

Valka: Up here!

(Astrid is climbing up a wall and dodges a Deathgripper's attacks. She swings on a Deathgripper's tail, kicks it in its face and climbs up the wall again. Cloudjumper arrives at the top of the building and tries to pull the net off of it)

Valka: Hurry!

(All the Riders except Hiccup are on the top of the building and get rescued by their dragons.)

Snotlout: Go! Go! Go! Go! Go!

Valka: Hiccup!

(However, Hiccup is still quite far from the top and doesn't look like he will make it as he realizes there is a big drop. He walks back a few steps, runs and then takes a leap just before a Deathgripper kills him. But then he gets saved by his mother.)

Valka: Gotcha! Go, Cloudjumper!

(They escape but the Deathgrippers are still trapped in the burning building because of the net. Suddenly, the Crimson Goregutter appears.)

Fishlegs: Yeah! Our hero!

(The Crimson Goregutter rams into the building and destroys it into pieces with the Deathgrippers falling down with it, too. Grimmel escapes his crumbling tower and watches the Riders fly away in anger. Fishmeat is screaming again and Ruffnut suddenly comes out of the building as well.)

Ruffnut: Ugh. He takes that stupid baby everywhere.

(Grimmel looks at Ruffnut in shock and realizes it is a Dragon Rider.)

(Scene cuts, back on New Berk with the Dragon Riders.)

(The Dragon Riders arrive back at New Berk.)

Gobber: Thor Almighty. Guess we won't be needing this then, huh?

(Gobber points at a wooden structure)

Hiccup: I led us right into his trap.

Tuffnut: Yeah, nice work, Chief. Right, Ruff?

(However, they realize that Ruffnut is not standing next to Tuffnut.)

Hiccup: Wait...

Tuffnut: Uh...

(Tuffnut's eyes widen at the sudden realization.)

Hiccup: Where is Ruffnut?

Fishlegs: We--we left her behind!

Astrid: How could you not notice she was missing? You ride a two-headed dragon.

Tuffnut: Oh, yeah. I feel like how Ruffnut is everyday... Dumb.

Gobber: Odin be spanked! This just gets better and better.

Tuffnut: I try to avoid looking at her because she gives me acid reflux.

Hiccup: O-Okay guys! Just keep your helmets on! Toothless and I will fly--

Viking: Toothless has the Light Fury now! He's probably not even coming back.

Hiccup: What?

Astrid: You gave him his freedom, Hiccup. What were you expecting?

Hiccup: I never thought he'd stay away for good! I-I... Ah... Look, I'll figure it out. I just need more time.

(Hiccup walks away on his own.)

Valka: He thinks he has to lead alone. Well, because his father had to.

(Hiccup, still walking away, drops his helmet onto the ground.)

Valka: He doesn't realize the strength you have together. Do you still believe in him?

Astrid: Of course. I wish he did, but he thinks he's nothing without Toothless.

Valka: Then help him realize the truth.

(Hiccup looks stressed and struggles to think. Astrid suddenly appears in front of him on Stormfly.)

Astrid: Get on!

Hiccup: What?

Astrid: We're going to find him.

(Astrid offers him a ride by holding out her hand.)

Hiccup: Really?

(Hiccup grabs her hand. The Riders hear a sound and turn around to see Hiccup and Astrid flying on Stormfly.)

Hiccup: Everybody, stay put! We will get Ruffnut back! Don't worry!

Tuffnut: Pffft. Worry? If they're stuck with Ruffnut, I'm more worried about them. (chuckles)

(Scene cuts, with Ruffnut, Grimmel, and the Warlords in another base.)

(Ruffnut has been captured and is standing in a prison cell, relaxed.)

Ruffnut: Why the long face? (laughs) I mean, mine's long, but yours is really long. All face and no brain. Like you got stretched at birth. Do you have a twin, too? Tuffnut took up all the room in Mom's belly. Otherwise, I'd have a rounder head and more brains, that's science.

(Grimmel starts getting annoyed at her but keeps working on what he's doing. Ruffnut sits down.)

Ruffnut: My braids are like little Zipplebacks, see.

(Ruffnut starts playing with her braids.)

Ruffnut: Rawr-rawr. Yeaaah. Even the mold spots look like eyes. So cute. They even have little horns and everything just like Barf and Belch. Except me and Barf can't stand Belch so they're really just Barfs. It's warm in here.

(Ruffnut stands up and walks to the cage door.)

Ruffnut: I know what you're thinking. You've never had a prisoner this hot.

(Ruffnut sits down again. Grimmel looks more annoyed.)

Ruffnut: All the boys love me. Except Eret, who totally lost his chance. That ship has sailed, boys, sorry. And Hiccup is practically married to that round head, Astrid. But Snotlout and Fishlegs, they're basically in my hand.

(Grimmel's pencil snaps and he becomes even more annoyed. Ruffnut is now swinging upside down.)

Ruffnut: Just can't choose, you know. Snotlout's a beefcake but almost too pretty, you know. Sometimes I think he's more in love with himself than me. There's only room for one beauty in this relationship. (laughs and walks to cage bars between her and a Scuttleclaw's cage) Fishlegs would keep me alive longer if I had to eat one of them. Stranded on some glacier somewhere. But he never shuts up about dragons. Do you hate it when people never stop talking?

Grimmel: Yyyeeessss, I dooo.

(Ruffnut swings again.)

Ruffnut: Bleh, bleh, bleh. It's sooo boring.

Griselda: Can't we just feed her to your dragons?

Ruffnut: What do you have to eat around here? I'm allergic to fish, you should know that. That's all they have in that stupid new island.

(Grimmel looks alert when Ruffnut says this.)

Ruffnut: Do you have any clams? They're like little mouths with slimy food inside that's already chewed like the way Mom used to do it.

Grimmel: ENOUGH!

(Grimmel shoves everything out of his way.)

Ruffnut: Until I turned twelve and she was like... "CHEW YOUR OWN FOOD!" And I was like, "NO I DON'T LIKE IT!"

(Grimmel opens Ruffnut's cage door.)

Grimmel: Most annoying creature ever to cross my path!

Ruffnut: Awww...

(Ruffnut strokes her hair and starts poking Grimmel's face with her Zippleback braids.)

Ruffnut: Oops. You let the dragons out. Gonna get ya. Gonna get ya. No, this one's gonna get ya.

(Grimmel stops Ruffnut by blocking his face with his hand. Chaghatai then opens the Scuttleclaw's cage and Grimmel throws Ruffnut's helmet at her.)

Grimmel: Take him and go, please! I beg you! The Deathgrippers will have to forego dinner.

Ruffnut: Ewww. You feed your dragons... dragons?

Grimmel: GO!

Ruffnut: Where's your bathroom? I gotta... (makes click sound)

(Grimmel turns and looks at Ruffnut, angrily.)

Ruffnut: Okay! Gods! No wonder you have grey hair.

(Ruffnut puts her helmet on and sits on the Scuttleclaw's back.)

Ruffnut: Stress is not good for you. Ha ha ha! So long, losers!

(Ruffnut has flown off and Grimmel looks devious.)

(Scene cuts, in the sky and above the ocean with Hiccup and Astrid riding Stormfly. They are still searching for Toothless.)

Hiccup: Where--where is she heading?

Astrid: She's tracking something, aren't you, girl?

(Stormfly flies closer to the ocean.)

Hiccup: There's nothing but miles and miles of--

(Suddenly, they notice water spray above the ocean and keep heading towards it. When they get closer, they find out it is a huge waterfall.)

Hiccup: A great waterfall--

Astrid: At the end of the world.

(They look at each other, stunned, and then Stormfly flies into the waterfall.)

Astrid: Stormfly!

(They enter the hidden world after flying through the waterfall. Stormfly scents' an entrance to the mushroom forest of the hidden world. They fly over bright blue water and then enter a section of the hidden world where there are tall pillars with bioluminescence. Stormfly starts to glow. Hiccup laughs.)

Astrid: Wow!

Hiccup: Look! (points at the edge of the cliff)

(They continue flying. When they fly past some dragon eggs, the eggs glow and the baby dragons become visible. They then fly with hundreds of thousands of Fireworms and try to touch some. Then, they arrive at the center point of the Hidden World, which is the throne room for the king of dragons. Astrid gasps. Astrid spots a dragon which is very close so she tries to hide and land somewhere. They land and start walking.)

Hiccup: It really does exist.

(Lots of dragons are flying above them so they try and lay low. They stop walking and lay down at the edge of a cliff, watching the dragons fly inside the hidden world. On a high part of the hidden world, Toothless is with the Light Fury.)

Hiccup: Toothless.

Astrid: Shhh. You'll spook them.

(Toothless and the Light Fury fly down from where they were and fly around with a group of dragons flying behind them. A few dragons watch and roar on the ground. Toothless and the Light Fury land on a gigantic crystal, looking over a large part of the Hidden World. All the dragons that are standing on the ground roar for Toothless. Toothless roars very loudly.)

Astrid: Now that's a king.

(After roaring, Toothless turns around and looks at the Light Fury, happily. The Light Fury walks to Toothless and then they both start flirting. Next, they sit side by side and watch the crowd of dragons bow for their king and queen. Hiccup looks upset as he realizes the truth for the future. Astrid looks at Hiccup and tries to comfort him.)

Hiccup: We should go.

(Suddenly, they find out a Rumblehorn is behind them.)

Hiccup and Astrid: (At the same time) Oh, no.

(They stand up and walk backwards away from the dragon just before stepping off. Hiccup tries to tame the dragon by holding out his hand but the dragon roars, causing all of the dragons to be aware of danger especially Toothless.)

Astrid: Stormfly!

(Hiccup and Astrid jump off of the cliff and slide down the cliff face. Toothless flies towards them and stops the other dragons from coming with him. The Light Fury looks worried and confused. As Hiccup and Astrid slide down, they dodge the dragons trying to attack them. They fall to the bottom of the cliff on their hands but stand up quickly.)

Astrid: Go! Go!

(They run away from the Rumblehorn which is still chasing them. Toothless pushes the dragons out of the way, trying to save Hiccup and Astrid. Toothless just manages to grab them.)

Hiccup: I-I'm sorry bud. I-I-I just--

(Toothless stops more dragons from attacking them and then they all escape safely. The scene fades out on Hiccup's face who looks depressed.)

(The scene fades into a flashback of Hiccup who notices his father, Stoick, is crying in front of the fireplace. Stoick realizes Hiccup is in the room.)

Stoick: Son! (wipes his tears away) You should be asleep.

Hiccup: I was thirsty.

Stoick: Yeah, come here.

(Hiccup climbs downstairs and runs to his dad. Stoick lifts Hiccup onto his lap and allows him to use tongs for the fire.)

Hiccup: Dad? Are you gonna get us a new mom?

(Stoick hugs Hiccup and kisses his head.)

Stoick: I don't want another. Your mom was the only woman for me. She was the love of my life. But with love comes loss, son. It's part of the deal. Sometimes it hurts, but in the end, it's all worth it. There's no greater gift than love.

(The flashback fades out on Stoick's heartfelt face.)

(Scene fades in, back with Hiccup, Toothless and Astrid all looking upset. They land back on New Berk with Toothless still unhappy. Hiccup looks at Toothless and then at the building being built on New Berk. Hiccup turns to Astrid who gives him a sympathetic look. Hiccup sighs and walks in front of Toothless.)

Hiccup: It's okay, bud. You belong there, with her. We don't.

(Toothless agrees but doesn't seem happy about it.)

Hiccup: And that's alright.

(Hiccup touches Toothless' face.)

Hiccup: We'll find a way to man--

(Unexpectedly, Toothless turns around quickly. He senses something and finds out the Light Fury has followed them. Toothless gets very excited.)

Hiccup: Hey! (Toothless licks his face and he laughs.) She followed us back!

(Toothless runs to the Light Fury and she jumps playfully on him.)

Hiccup: We might not have to say goodbye after all.

(Toothless licks the Light Fury before running back to Hiccup; however, the Light Fury stays where she is. Toothless makes a gentle sound, tries to convince her to follow him. The Light Fury looks at where Hiccup and Astrid are and slowly starts to follow Toothless.)

Hiccup: That's it.

(Ruffnut appears on the Scuttleclaw.)

Ruffnut: Woohoo! Yeah!

(Hiccup and Astrid turn around.)

Astrid: Ruffnut?

(She gets off the dragon and throws her helmet away.)

Ruffnut: Miss me?

Astrid: How did you escape?

Ruffnut: I annoyed them till they let me go.

Hiccup: Wai-wait... Grimmel LET you go?

Ruffnut: So dumb. They couldn't handle me. See, everyone thinks Tuffnut's more annoying but--

Astrid: But hold on.

Hiccup: Ruffnut! Focus. Were you followed?

Ruffnut: I never look back, Hiccup.

Hiccup: (gasps) Toothless!

(He runs to Toothless. Meanwhile, Toothless and the Light Fury are still slowly walking.)

Hiccup: Toothless!

(The Light Fury senses danger and quickly flies off the island and tell Toothless to follow her. Nonetheless, the Light Fury gets hits by a dart and starts falling. Toothless runs to save her, but she falls to the ground and slides to the edge of the cliff.)

Hiccup: Toothless! Come back!

(However, Toothless continues to run towards the Light Fury but then Grimmel appears and points his bow at Toothless. Toothless gets ready to fire a plasma blast but Grimmel shoots first, knocking him unconscious.)

Hiccup: No!

(Grimmel chains Toothless and the Light Fury up just before Hiccup could get to him. Grimmel flies away on his Airship. Astrid and Ruffnut catch up to Hiccup.)

Grimmel: Now our little game must come to an end.

(Berk's dragons fly towards Grimmel's airship to protect their Alpha.)

Grimmel: Call them off, Alpha! (mounts onto his harpoon and aims it at the Light Fury) No reason for her to die too!

(Toothless notices the dragons are flying to him, so he roars at them to prevent them from flying too close to him. They stop flying. The rest of the riders arrive at the scene.)

Snotlout: What are they doing? They could totally take him!

Hiccup: Not with her life on the line.

(Toothless roars at Grimmel's Deathgrippers to try to make them fly away too, but they threaten Toothless instead.)

Grimmel: Save your breath! The only Alpha they respond to is me!

(Toothless gives up and looks at Hiccup.)

Grimmel: Awww, don't feel too badly. You tried your best! But, you are nothing without your dragon.

(Grimmel whistles, causing his Deathgrippers to fly to the other dragons and prevent them from flying past them. Grimmel flies away and Toothless urges the other dragons to follow him anyway. They follow and Hiccup runs to the edge of the cliff.)

Hiccup: Toothless!

(Hiccup stops running and watches as the dragons fly away. He then starts pacing around.)

Tuffnut: Oh, that is just... ugh, great! Now what?

Snotlout: I think it's time (Pushes Eret's arm) for number two to become number one.

Valka: (Puts a hand on Astrid's shoulder) He'll listen to you.

(Astrid nods and starts walking up to Hiccup.)

Hiccup: (Keeps pacing around and sees Astrid) Don't say it.

Astrid: (Holds up both her hands) I wasn't going to.

Hiccup: I shouldn't have dragged you out there. He wouldn't have flown me back. She wouldn't have followed.

Astrid: Yep.

Hiccup: Aah! I feel like the same screw up I was before I met Toothless.

Astrid: I can see that.

Hiccup: (Stops walking and looks at Astrid) Are you just gonna stand there and agree with everything?

Astrid: Well, you're right. You're back to where you started. But I was the first to believe in you. And I have watched you doubt whether you're worthy ever since. But you know what? I am the person I am today because of you. I never told you that, but it's true. You are the bravest, most stubborn, most determined...knucklehead I know. Toothless didn't give you that, Hiccup. He just made it--

Hiccup: Easier.

Astrid: And now it's gonna be a lot harder. So... what are you gonna do about it?

Hiccup: (shrugs) Probably something stupid.

Astrid: That's the Hiccup I know.

(Hiccup kisses Astrid on the cheek and walks towards the riders.)

Hiccup: Suit up, gang! We're gonna get them back.

Fishlegs: What?

Ruffnut: He's lost his mind.

Tuffnut: Now that's (hugs Hiccup) marriage material. At last, faithful pupil, you are ready.

(Hiccup and Tuffnut nod at each other.)

Fishlegs: Umm. How are we gonna get our dragons back... without dragons?

Hiccup: Trust me.

(The dragons arrive at the Dragon Trapper ships. Cloudjumper lands on a ship.)

Dragon Trapper: Move! (Pokes Cloudjumper with a staff but Cloudjumper roars at the trapper)

(Toothless roars at Cloudjumper to stop him from getting angry.)

Grimmel: Umm. That's right, Alpha. No surprises.

(Toothless reluctantly growls at Cloudjumper, telling him to go into the cage. He goes into the cage and knocks two trappers over. Lots of dragons are also locked inside cages.)

Ruffnut: So... jump off the cliff... in these. (Expands her dragon flight suit.) That's the best you've got?

Hiccup: No. You guys are the best I've got.

Ruffnut: Aww. (Strokes her hair.) I'm with him, who else?

Tuffnut: Ruffnut... that was my line.

Hiccup: Let's go!

(Hiccup and Astrid run to the edge of the cliff.)

Astrid: Try to keep up!

(They both jump off of the cliff and expand their dragon flight suits, flying to the Dragon Trapper ships.)

Astrid: Woohoo!

Tuffnut: Woo!

Ruffnut: Woohoo!

Snotlout: Yeah!

Fishlegs: Woah!

Tuffnut: I'm doing it!

(The rest of the gang jump off of the cliff and fly to the Dragon Trapper ships.)

(Grimmel starts to lower Toothless down while the Warlords are preparing to collect him. Toothless growls at Ragnar when he's about to touch him)

Grimmel: Aww. (laughs) You didn't think I'd actually hand you the night fury, did you? He's mine to kill.

Griselda: That snake!

Grimmel: I intend to finish what I started. Best of luck controlling them without an Alpha.

Hiccup: Hold on, Toothless!

(Grimmel turns around and sees the riders gliding towards them with their flight suits.)

Tuffnut: Waa-ah--wah

(Tuffnut grabs Ruffnut's foot then she kicks him out)

Ruffnut: Let's go!

Snotlout: Aagh! I could have used some practice!

Fishlegs: Oh, I should have skipped breakfast!

(Grimmel turns around with his harpoon at the ready, only to be knocked off his seat by Hiccup. Grimmel grabs onto a wooden part of the harpoon while the other Dragon Riders fly past him. Hiccup, spinning around, expands his flight suit, flies past some ships, then grabs onto some rope to swing himself around.)

Hiccup: Toothless!

(Toothless, hearing Hiccup, roars at Cloudjumper, who then bursts from his cage and breathes fire at the Dragon Trappers. Grump and Skullcrusher also get freed and all three dragons start flying back to the island. Toothless roars at Cloudjumper, who understands, then goes to the island with Grump and Skullcrusher. At the same time, Hiccup, Tuffnut, Ruffnut, Astrid and Fishlegs land on a boat ready to fight. Fishmeat snarls.)

Hiccup: Perfect timing!

(Astrid gets a weapon out from a wooden box of weapons and Hiccup lights up Inferno. All the Dragon Trappers start running towards them.)

Hiccup: Game faces!

(The riders look at Snotlout who is hanging from a wooden dragon by its teeth thanks to his cape.)

Snotlout: Yeah, what are you waiting for? Get in there! 

(Hiccup sighs and the Dragon Riders head into battle.)

Fishlegs: Yeah!

(The gang knocks off a few hunters. Meanwhile, Toothless rips off his muzzle and roars at Grimmel, who mounts onto his harpoon and aims it at Toothless. However, once he sees Toothless charging a plasma blast, he leaps out of the way as Toothless blast destroys one of the airship arms, sending it spiraling. Grimmel clings to the falling airship and WHISTLES a command to his Deathgrippers, but Toothless shoots another blast and the Deathgrippers start struggling to keep the airship aloft.)

(Below, Astrid battles a soldier on a gangway. He parries her blow and corners her, raising his sword for the kill, when...)

Hiccup: Heads up!

(...Hiccup cuts a nearby rigging line, releasing a sail boom that sweeps through and sends the soldier flying off of the gangway.)

Astrid: Thanks. Look out!

(Astrid throws a hammer towards Hiccup, who dodges as it whizzes past him and takes out a soldier who was about to attack Hiccup.)

Hiccup: Thanks.

(Astrid grabs a canister from Hiccup's belt, bites off the wax seal and tosses it to the deck below. Then, Hiccup throws his Dragon Blade into the gas cloud. Soldiers panic and flee as a fireball erupts, framing the couple with an explosion behind them.)

(Astrid whistles to call Stormfly and points to the sky, then to Hiccup. Stormfly swoops in and plucks Hiccup, carrying him towards the airship, that is engulfed in flames and dropping steadily. A freed Deathgripper bumps into Stormfly, knocking Hiccup out of her grasp and throwing him through the air until he grabs onto the airship.)

Hiccup: I'm coming, Toothless!

(Grimmel shimmies down the chain to the Light Fury.)

Grimmel: You still think he cares about you?!

(He puts a vial of venom into the Light Furys collar, subduing her into obedience.)

Grimmel: Let's just see who he follows!

(He releases the latch, springing the Light Fury from her restraint. She flies off, groggy and obedient, carrying Grimmel on her back. Toothless watches, raging and struggling against his ties.)

(Hiccup launches himself into the air until he grasps Toothless' chain and climbs down through the ties until he's next to Toothless' head.)

Hiccup: I'm sorry, bud! For everything!

(He takes off Toothless' collar.)

(Just as the flaming airship crashes into the sea, Hiccup pulls the release latch, freeing Toothless. Suddenly, Hiccup and Toothless come out of the water flying and tear off in pursuit of Grimmel and the Light Fury.)

Hiccup: Now let's go get her!

(The remaining Deathgrippers head after them.)

(A soldier yells a battle cry and charges the Gang. Tuffnut clocks him from behind, then hurls his war hammer to Snotlout, who takes out another soldier, then...)

Snotlout: Number two, coming through!

(...tosses his hammer back to Tuffnut, who effortlessly uses it to knock out yet another.)

Tuffnut: Surprise! Sorry about that!

Snotlout: Come on!

(Snotlout rolls over the tussle and grabs the hammer,bringing itdown heavily to smash the lock off of a cage,freeing the Gorecutter within.)

Snotlout: Yeah! One more freed, four to go! Try to keep up!

(The Goregutter roars and takes to the air, passing Fishlegs engaged in combat on an upper deck.)

Fishlegs: I got your backs! (He pushes his adversary off of the deck then, seeing his friends about to be attacked by a horde of soldiers below, grabs a line and hook, and swings down to their rescue, knocking over soldiers like a wrecking ball. He lands and eyes the damage, impressed.) Yeah! It's almost like we're a team!

(The line and heavy hook swing back, knocking Fishlegs to the deck and sending Fishmeat tumbling from his pouch. Ivar raises his sword to the baby.

Ivar: Oh. You brought a baby to a battle?

Fishlegs: Uh-uh. I wouldn't do that if I were you.

(They look up to the Goregutter, roaring with rage as he flies in to protect Fishmeat. He crashes through the masts, bringing a storm of wreckage down upon the fleeing soldiers.)

Ivar: Look out!

(Fishlegs beams, placing Fishmeat back into his pouch.)

Fishlegs: God, I love that dragon.

(The Warlords look on in shock, then turn to find themselves confronted by Eret, Gobber, and Valka, who have now arrived on their respective dragons. They brandish their weapons in invitation.)

Gobber: Sorry, we're late for the party.

(The Warlords pull out their swords.)

Chaghatai: You're right on time.

(Grimmel steers the Light Fury past billowing clouds, with Hiccup and Toothless in pursuit. He looks back and grins.)

Grimmel: That's it. That's it.

(He passes a bank of storm clouds, spotting the rocky spires of New Berk in the distance. He veers off toward them. Toothless fires at Grimmel, but he rolls the Light Fury, forcing her to take the impact of the blast against her wing. She yelps in pain.)

Hiccup: How are we going to get him off her back without hurting her?

(Tuffnut surprises a soldier, dropping to the deck in front of him.)

Tuffnut: Fear the facial hair!

(The soldier swipes impulsively ,slicing through Tuffnut's "beard." It drops away from his chin in two halves. He gasps, causing him scream in rage and chase the terrified soldier across the deck. Where Gobber and Ragnar are trading blows.)

Gobber Oh, I have missed this!

Ragnar: Me too!

(Ragnar knocks Gobber to the deck,then pauses to notice Hobgobbler staring eerily from the railing.)

Gobber: See that there?

Ragnar: Aw, cute.

Gobber: That's a bad omen. You're cursed.

(Suddenly, the Hobgobbler shrieks, signaling a horde of Hobgobblers to pour over the railing and chew apart the deck like hungry piranha. Ragnar screams and flees for his life as Gobber laughs.)

Gobber: Yes! Good on ye! (He notices a Hobgobbler chewing on his peg-leg.) Eh, I guess youre not so bad after all.

(Astrid silently appears behind the Helmsman and deftly knocks him out. She then spins the ship's wheel and sinks her axe into the deck, bracing the wheel into a sharp turn. The decks leans heavily to port as the flag ship collides with the battle ship to her left, beginning a chain reaction.)

Trapper: Abandon ship!

(Dragon cages slide across the pitched deck, colliding and furthering the chaos. Griselda and Chaghatai become trapped in one of them. Freed dragons take to the air. The Rescue Team has succeeded. The battle is won.)

Astrid: Yeah!

(Grimmel leads the chase through the tall, craggy rocks of New Berk. Toothless and Hiccup zigzag behind, closing in. Suddenly, the four remaining Deathgrippers appear from behind a rocky spire, bombarding Hiccup and Toothless.)

Hiccup: Uh, we've got problems.

(One of them tries to hit Hiccup with his claw, but Toothless rolls and hits the Deathgripper with his wings. Then he blasts a passing rocky arch, burying another Deathgripper in an explosion of boulders.)

(They keep chasing Grimmel, but the Deathgrippers keep bumping into Toothless, trying to make him fall. Meanwhile, on the ground below, the Berkians watch the pursuit with rapt intensity.)

Viking: Take him down, Hiccup!

(The crowd cheers for their chief. One of the Deathgrippers clamps onto Toothless and tries to stab him with his stinger.)

Hiccup: We need a better plan!

(The second Deathgripper holds Toothless by his right side.)

Hiccup: And quick!

(The third Deathgripper grabs Toothless' left side, making him unable to move. Toothless comes up with an idea. He splits his dorsal plates apart and static begins to crackle between them.)

Hiccup: Uh, what... what are you doing?

(Amazed, Hiccup sees patches of Toothless' scaly skin begin to turn mirror-like, including the Toothless scales on his own dragon armor. It suddenly dawns upon him what Toothless is attempting.)

Hiccup: Okay... okay.

(Toothless focuses and roars, commanding lightning to arc from the stormy sky and strike them as they drop from the sky. In a flash, they disappear and the Deathgrippers are electrocuted. The Berkians gasp in awe as they watch the lightning blast illuminate the sky, followed by a complete disappearance of Hiccup and Toothless.)

(Grimmel looks back, baffled to see his lifeless Deathgrippers dropping from the sky. He looks around frantically. Suddenly, Hiccup and Toothless re-materialize in front of him at close range and Toothless roars. Hiccup leaps toward Grimmel, throwing open the wings of his armor.)

Hiccup: AAGGH!

(Grimmel shoots a dart from his crossbow. Hiccup twists in the air, avoiding it, but the dart hits Toothless, making him yelp in pain and knocking him unconscious. Hiccup crashes into Grimmel, knocking him off of the Light Fury's back.)

Grimmel: AAGGH! You'll kill both of us! Fighting over a dragon? That's your plan?!

(Hiccup watches in terror as Toothless falls from the sky. With Grimmel clinging to him, Hiccup makes a desperate choice.)

Hiccup: This is.

(Hiccup takes off the Light Fury's drug collar and drops it. She shakes off the grogginess, regaining full awareness and turns to Hiccup.)

Hiccup: Save him.

(He lets go, plummeting with Grimmel. Distressed, the Light Fury watches him, but then shrieks to let Hiccup know she understood and races off to rescue her mate. As Hiccup falls, Grimmel clings to him in vain. But Hiccup is only focused on Toothless, watching as the Light Fury rescues him from his fall and hauls him safely to a cliff-top.)

(Hiccup smiles, relieved. Then Grimmel grabs him and begins tearing apart his leather wings. Hiccup tries to kick him away, but Grimmel clings to his prosthetic leg. Then Hiccup hears a sound growing closer. He looks up to see the Light Fury racing towards him. He thinks fast and detaches his prosthetic leg, freeing himself from Grimmel.)

Grimmel: AAH! NOOOOOO!

(Grimmel crashes into the sea with an explosive splash as the Light Fury swoops in and grabs Hiccup at the last second. Hiccup looks up, stunned. The Light Fury looks under her belly to meet his eyes and coos.)

Hiccup: See? I knew you'd come around.

(The Light Fury carries Hiccup to the cliffs and drops him close to Toothless and lands on the grass. The rest of the riders, the Berkians and their dragons arrive, whooping and cheering. Hiccup stands up and hops, one-legged, towards Toothless, then falls to his knees and caresses his nose with his finger.)

Hiccup: Hey, good morning, bud.

(Toothless starts to regain consciousness after being sedated by Grimmel.)

Hiccup: Here you go.

(Hiccup sits down to pat Toothless' head.)

Hiccup: Boy, you are full of surprises.

(The Light Fury walks over to Hiccup and Toothless, Hiccup putting his hand on the Light Fury.)

Hiccup: He's all yours.

(Standing himself up, Hiccup hops back to Astrid, who supports him. The Light Fury helps Toothless stand up while all the dragons and Vikings look on. Gobber and Eret both chuckle at each other, while Snotlout is not looking impressed.)

Valka: You know, Eret may be blessed with brawn but, just between us, you have the brains.

Snotlout: Number one.

(Hiccup and Astrid, both smiling, nod at each other and press their heads together. Toothless, after walking past the Light Fury, looks at Hiccup, who smiles at him. Toothless looks towards the horizon and back to Hiccup again. Hiccup also looks at the horizon and back to Toothless. He then hops to Toothless and holds his face.)

Hiccup: You're right, bud. It's time. I was so busy fighting for a world that I wanted, I didn't think about what you needed.

(Hiccup looks at the Light Fury.)

Hiccup: You've looked after us for long enough. Time to look after yourselves.

(Astrid looks at Stormfly and takes her saddle off.)

Astrid: Oh, Stormfly, my good girl.

(Gobber takes his saddle off of Grump.)

Gobber: All right, Grumpy. Off you go.

(Eret takes his saddle off of Skullcrusher.)

Eret: So long, you big ugly beast. I'll miss you.

(All the other dragon riders take off their saddles.)

Valka: Oh, Cloudjumper. Oh.

(Tuffnut nudges Ruffnut, who looks at him sadly. After watching this, Hiccup looks back at Toothless again.)

Hiccup: Go on, bud. Lead them to the Hidden World. You'll be safe there. Safer than you could ever be with me. It's okay. (Places his head on Toothless' head.) I love you too. And I want you to be free. Our world doesn't deserve you... yet.

(Toothless hugs Hiccup.)

Hiccup: Go, Toothless. Go.

(Hiccup places his hand on Toothless' snout and then moves his hand away from Toothless. Hiccup nods and then Toothless roars, followed by all the dragons on the island. The Light Fury flies off the island to the Hidden World first, followed by the other dragons except Toothless. Toothless turns his head to Hiccup who nods and then he flies off the island with the other dragons. The Riders walk to Hiccup as he smiles at the dragons.)

(The scene cuts to three months later, where the villagers attend Hiccup and Astrid's wedding as they finally get married. Hiccup and Astrid join hands and smile at each other. Gobber holds a bouquet of flowers and wipes away a tear on his face. Gothi covers Hiccup and Astrid's joined hands with a ceremonial cloth and taps the cloth with her staff. Hiccup and Astrid kiss each other.)

Spitelout: To the chief and chieftess!

(The villagers all cheer.)

Villagers: Yeah!

(Gobber throws the bouquet of flowers and Eret catches them. He looks surprised but then smiles. Snotlout wipes away a tear and starts crying.)

Tuffnut: Come, cry into my full thick beard.

(Snotlout buries his face in Tuffnut's braided beard and continues crying.)

Fishlegs: (crying) Oh, it's so beautiful!

Ruffnut: Gross.

Fishlegs: Oh... (He hugs Ruffnut and continues crying.)

Ruffnut: Okay, you win. I like sensitive guys. (She hugs Fishlegs back.)

Villager #1: Oh-ho-ho!

Villager #2: Yeah!

Hoark: Finally, right?

(Later, the newlyweds stand on a cliff face and look out toward the horizon, soon joined by Gobber, Valka, and the other Dragon Riders. Hiccup and Astrid put an arm around each other and lean their heads, wearing thoughtful expressions.)

(Epilogue scene cuts to nine years later. A young boy with blond hair, revealed to be Hiccup and Astrid's son, is held by a now-bearded Hiccup sailing a boat. Meanwhile, Astrid and their daughter, a young red-haired girl, raise one of the sails as the boat journeys across the sea.)

Hiccup: There were dragons when I was a boy. Oh, there were great grim sky dragons that nested on the cliff tops like gigantic scary birds. Little brown scuddly dragons that hunted down the mice and rats and well-organized packs. Preposterously huge sea dragons that were 20 times as big as the big blue whale. Some say they crawled back into the sea leaving not a bone or a fang to remember them. Others say they were nothing but folk tales to begin with. I'm okay with that. Hey. Hey there, bud. Remember me?

(Toothless continues to eye Hiccup suspiciously and slowly advances toward him. The two children cringe in fear and hide their faces while Astrid comforts them.)

Astrid: It's okay.

(Hiccup holds out his hand while turning his head away. Toothless sniffs Hiccup's hand and immediately recognizes his old friend. He then embraces Hiccup while tackling him to the deck of the boat.)

Hiccup: Oh! Ah! Oh-ho-ho. Hey, I'm glad to see you, too, bud.

(Toothless jumps around Hiccup excitedly. Astrid shows a relieved look on her face.)

Astrid: Ah! He's not gonna eat your father.

(Toothless starts licking Hiccup's bearded face.)

Hiccup: How's the tail holding up? Could probably use some oil and little fine-tuning.

Astrid: Look, it's okay. They're friends.

(The two children look up and watch. Toothless nuzzles Hiccup's face and licks him again.)

Hiccup: Ah! Come on!

(Toothless turns his gaze to Hiccup and Astrid's children.)

Hiccup: Here.

Astrid: Go on. It's alright.

(Astrid gently nudges the two children and they nervously approach Toothless.)

Hiccup: Come. He won't hurt you. Hold your hands out. Like this. That's it.

(Hiccup helps them each hold out a hand. The two children cover their faces in fear.)

Hiccup: Let him come to you.

(Toothless gently presses his snout against the two children's hands. They both gasp and look amazed. Later, Hiccup and his son fly on Toothless. Hiccup throws his son at one point and then catches him. The Light Fury flies beside them with her three baby dragons. One baby dragon does an invisibility maneuver and reappears. Astrid and her daughter fly on Stormfly and whoosh past Toothless. Hiccup gives Toothless a gentle pat, and Toothless catches up to Stormfly.)

Hiccup: Legend says that when the ground quakes or lava spews from the earth, it's the dragons letting us know they're still here, waiting for us to figure out how to get along. Yes, the world believes the dragons are gone, if they ever existed at all. But we Berkians... we know otherwise. And we'll guard the secret until the time comes when dragons can return in peace.
